      Withdrawn NIST Technical Series Publication

                                           Warning Notice

The attached publication has been withdrawn (archived), and is provided solely for historical purposes.
It may have been superseded by another publication (indicated below).

Withdrawn Publication
Series/Number            NIST Special Publication 800-64 Revision 2
Title                    Security Considerations in the System Development Life Cycle
Publication Date(s)      October 2008
Withdrawal Date          May 31, 2019
Withdrawal Note          This withdrawn publication includes content that is out of date. It is provided
                         here for historical reference.

                         Readers should refer to NIST SP 800-160 Volume 1 for current information
                         about system life cycle processes and systems security engineering. NIST
                         intends to develop a white paper that describes how the Risk Management
                         Framework (SP 800-37 Rev. 2) relates to system development life cycle
                         processes and stages.

Superseding Publication(s) (if applicable)

The attached publication has been superseded by the following publication(s):
Series/Number
Title
Author(s)
Publication Date(s)
URL/DOI
Additional Information (if applicable)
Contact                  Computer Security Division (Information Technology Laboratory)
Latest revision of the
attached publication
Related Information      https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/systems-security-engineering-project
                         https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-64/rev-2/archive/2008-10-16
Withdrawal
Announcement Link




Date updated: May 31, 2019
NIST Special Publication 800-64 Revision 2   Security Considerations in the
                                             System Development Life Cycle
                                             Richard Kissel
                                             Kevin Stine
                                             Matthew Scholl
                                             Hart Rossman
                                             Jim Fahlsing
                                             Jessica Gulick




               INFORMATION                                              SECURITY




                                              Computer Security Division
                                              Information Technology Laboratory
                                              National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                              Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930

                                              October 2008




                                              U.S. Department of Commerce
                                              Carlos M. Gutierrez, Secretary

                                              National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                              Patrick D. Gallagher, Deputy Director
                      Reports on Computer Systems Technology
The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical
leadership for the Nation’s measurement and standards infrastructure. ITL develops tests, test
methods, reference data, proof of concept implementations, and technical analyses to advance
the development and productive use of information technology. ITL’s responsibilities include the
development of management, administrative, technical, and physical standards and guidelines for
the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive unclassified information in federal computer
systems. This Special Publication 800-series reports on ITL’s research, guidelines, and outreach
efforts in information security, and its collaborative activities with industry, government, and
academic organizations.




                                                i
                                            Authority
This document has been developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) in furtherance of its statutory responsibilities under the Federal Information Security
Management Act (FISMA) of 2002, Public Law 107-347.

NIST is responsible for developing standards and guidelines, including minimum requirements,
for providing adequate information security for all agency operations and assets, but such
standards and guidelines shall not apply to national security systems. This guideline is consistent
with the requirements of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, Section
8b(3), Securing Agency Information Systems, as analyzed in A-130, Appendix IV: Analysis of
Key Sections. Supplemental information is provided A-130, Appendix III.

This guideline has been prepared for use by federal agencies. It may also be used by
nongovernmental organizations on a voluntary basis and is not subject to copyright regulations.
(Attribution would be appreciated by NIST.)

Nothing in this document should be taken to contradict standards and guidelines made
mandatory and binding on federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under statutory
authority. Nor should these guidelines be interpreted as altering or superseding the existing
authorities of the Secretary of Commerce, Director of the OMB, or any other federal official.

 Certain commercial entities, equipment, or materials may be identified in this document in order
 to describe an experimental procedure or concept adequately. Such identification is not
 intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor is it intended to imply that the
 entities, materials, or equipment are necessarily the best available for the purpose.




                                                 ii
                                     Acknowledgements
The authors, Richard Kissel, Kevin Stine, and Matthew Scholl from NIST, wish to thank their
colleagues, Hart Rossman, Jim Fahlsing and Jessica Gulick, from Science Applications
International Corporation (SAIC), who helped update this document, prepare drafts, and review
materials. In addition, special thanks are due to the original authors, as well as our reviewers,
Arnold Johnson, John Garguilo, Marianne Swanson, and Elizabeth Lennon from NIST who
greatly contributed to the document’s development. NIST also gratefully acknowledges and
appreciates the many contributions from individuals in the public and private sectors whose
thoughtful and constructive comments improved the quality and usefulness of this publication.




                                                iii
                                                                 Table of Contents

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .........................................................................................................................................1

INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................................................2
    1.1         PURPOSE AND SCOPE ...................................................................................................................................2
    1.2         AUDIENCE ...................................................................................................................................................2
    1.3         VALUE TO AGENCY MISSIONS, SECURITY PROGRAMS, AND IT MANAGEMENT...........................................2
    1.4         DOCUMENT ORGANIZATION ........................................................................................................................3
OVERVIEW OF INFORMATION SECURITY AND THE SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT LIFE CYCLE
FUNDAMENTALS .....................................................................................................................................................4
    2.1         ESTABLISHING A COMMON UNDERSTANDING .............................................................................................5
    2.2         LEGACY SYSTEM CONSIDERATIONS ............................................................................................................8
    2.3         KEY ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES IN THE SDLC.......................................................................................8
INCORPORATING SECURITY INTO THE SDLC.............................................................................................11
    3.1         SDLC PHASE: INITIATION .........................................................................................................................13
    3.2         SDLC PHASE: DEVELOPMENT/ACQUISITION ............................................................................................21
    3.3         SDLC PHASE: IMPLEMENTATION / ASSESSMENT ......................................................................................28
    3.4         SDLC PHASE: OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE ......................................................................................32
    3.5         SDLC PHASE: DISPOSAL ...........................................................................................................................36
ADDITIONAL SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS.................................................................................................40
    4.1         SUPPLY CHAIN AND SOFTWARE ASSURANCE ............................................................................................40
    4.2         SERVICE-ORIENTED ARCHITECTURE .........................................................................................................41
    4.3         SPECIFIC ACCREDITATION OF SECURITY MODULES FOR REUSE ................................................................41
    4.4         CROSS-ORGANIZATIONAL SOLUTIONS ......................................................................................................42
    4.5         TECHNOLOGY ADVANCEMENT AND MAJOR MIGRATIONS ........................................................................42
    4.6         DATA CENTER OR IT FACILITY DEVELOPMENT.........................................................................................43
    4.7         VIRTUALIZATION.......................................................................................................................................44
APPENDIX A - GLOSSARY ................................................................................................................................ A-1

APPENDIX B - ACRONYMS ................................................................................................................................B-1

APPENDIX C - REFERENCES............................................................................................................................ C-1

APPENDIX D - NIST REFERENCE MATRIX AND WEBSITES ................................................................... D-1

APPENDIX E - OTHER SDLC METHODOLOGIES ........................................................................................E-1

APPENDIX F - ADDITIONAL ACQUISITION PLANNING CONSIDERATIONS ......................................F-1

APPENDIX G - ADDITIONAL GRAPHICAL VIEWS OF SECURITY WITHIN SDLC............................. G-1




                                                                                    iv
TABLE OF FIGURES
FIGURE 2-1. POSITIONING SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS .................................................................................................4
FIGURE 3-1. THE SDLC – A CONCEPTUAL VIEW ..........................................................................................................11
FIGURE 3-2. RELATING SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN INITIATION PHASE .................................................................13
FIGURE 3-3. RELATING SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN THE DEVELOPMENT/ACQUISITION PHASE ..............................21
FIGURE 3-4. RELATING SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN THE IMPLEMENTATION/ASSESSMENT PHASE .........................28
FIGURE 3-5. RELATING SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN THE OPERATIONS/MAINTENANCE PHASE...............................32
FIGURE 3-6. RELATING SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN THE DISPOSAL PHASE ............................................................36




                                                                         v
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Special Publication (SP) 800-64,
Security Considerations in the System Development Life Cycle, has been developed to assist
federal government agencies in integrating essential information technology (IT) security steps
into their established IT system development life cycle (SDLC). This guideline applies to all
federal IT systems other than national security systems. The document is intended as a reference
resource rather than as a tutorial and should be used in conjunction with other NIST publications
as needed throughout the development of the system.

This publication serves a federal audience of information system and information security
professionals, including information system owners, information owners, information system
developers and program managers.

To be most effective, information security must be integrated into the SDLC from system
inception. Early integration of security in the SDLC enables agencies to maximize return on
investment in their security programs, through:

 • Early identification and mitigation of security vulnerabilities and misconfigurations, resulting
     in lower cost of security control implementation and vulnerability mitigation;
 • Awareness of potential engineering challenges caused by mandatory security controls;

 • Identification of shared security services and reuse of security strategies and tools to reduce
     development cost and schedule while improving security posture through proven methods
     and techniques; and
 • Facilitation of informed executive decision making through comprehensive risk management
     in a timely manner.
This guide focuses on the information security components of the SDLC. First, descriptions of
the key security roles and responsibilities that are needed in most information system
developments are provided. Second, sufficient information about the SDLC is provided to allow
a person who is unfamiliar with the SDLC process to understand the relationship between
information security and the SDLC.

This document integrates the security steps into the linear, sequential (a.k.a. waterfall) SDLC.
The five-step SDLC cited in this document is an example of one method of development and is
not intended to mandate this methodology.

Lastly, SP 800-64 provides insight into IT projects and initiatives that are not as clearly defined
as SDLC-based developments, such as service-oriented architectures, cross-organization
projects, and IT facility developments.




                                                 1
CHAPTER ONE

INTRODUCTION


C
       onsideration of security in the System Development Life Cycle is essential to
       implementing and integrating a comprehensive strategy for managing risk for all
       information technology assets in an organization. The National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) Special Publication (SP) 800-64 is intended to assist federal government
agencies to integrate essential security activities into their established system development life
cycle guidelines.

1.1 Purpose and Scope
The purpose of this guideline is to assist agencies in building security into their IT development
processes. This should result in more cost-effective, risk-appropriate security control
identification, development, and testing. This guide focuses on the information security
components of the SDLC. Overall system implementation and development is considered outside
the scope of this document. Also considered outside scope is an organization’s information
system governance process.

First, the guideline describes the key security roles and responsibilities that are needed in
development of most information systems. Second, sufficient information about the SDLC is
provided to allow a person who is unfamiliar with the SDLC process to understand the
relationship between information security and the SDLC.

The scope of this document is security activities that occur within a waterfall SDLC
methodology. It is intended that this could be translated into any other SDLC methodology that
an agency may have adopted.

1.2 Audience
This publication is intended to serve a diverse federal audience of information system and
information security professionals including: (i) individuals with information system and
information security management and oversight responsibilities (e.g., chief information officers,
senior agency information security officers, and authorizing officials); (ii) organizational
officials having a vested interest in the accomplishment of organizational missions (e.g., mission
and business area owners, information owners); (iii) individuals with information system
development responsibilities (e.g., program and project managers, information system
developers); and (iv) individuals with information security implementation and operational
responsibilities (e.g., information system owners, information owners, information system
security officers).

1.3 Value to Agency Missions, Security Programs, and IT Management
Federal agencies are heavily dependent upon their information and information systems to
successfully conduct critical missions. With an increasing reliability on and growing complexity
of information systems as well as a constantly changing risk environment, information security
has become a mission-essential function. This function must be conducted in a manner that
reduces the risks to the information entrusted to the agency, its overall mission, and its ability to


                                                  2
do business and to serve the American public. Information security is a business enabler when
applied through proper and effective management of risks to information confidentiality,
integrity, and availability.

Agencies may realize the value of integrating security into an established system development
life cycle in many ways, including:

 • Early identification and mitigation of security vulnerabilities and misconfigurations, resulting
       in lower cost of security control implementation and vulnerability mitigation;
 • Awareness of potential engineering challenges caused by mandatory security controls;

 • Identification of shared security services and reuse of security strategies and tools to reduce
       development cost and schedule while improving security posture through proven methods
       and techniques;
 • Facilitation of informed executive decision making through comprehensive risk management
       in a timely manner;
 • Documentation of important security decisions made during development, ensuring
       management that security was fully considered during all phases;
 • Improved organization and customer confidence to facilitate adoption and usage as well as
       governmental confidence to promote continued investment; and
 • Improved systems interoperability and integration that would otherwise be hampered by
       securing systems at various system levels.
1.4 Document Organization
The remaining chapters of this guide discuss the following:
   •    Chapter 2, Overview of Information Security and the System Development Life Cycle,
        summarizes the relationship between the SDLC and other IT disciplines, establishes a
        common understanding of SDLC, and the discusses the roles and responsibilities
        involved in integrating information security into the SDLC.
   •    Chapter 3, Incorporating Security into the Information System Development Life Cycle,
        describes a number of security considerations that will help integrate Information security
        into each phase of the SDLC.
   •    Chapter 4, Additional Security Considerations, highlights security considerations for
        development scenarios, such as service-oriented architectures and virtualization, for
        which the approach to security integration varies somewhat from that of traditional
        system development efforts.
This guide contains seven appendices. Appendix A provides a glossary of terms. Appendix B
presents a comprehensive list of acronyms. Appendix C lists references cited in this publication.
Appendix D provides a mapping of relevant NIST publications to corresponding SDLC security
activities. Appendix E gives an overview of other SDLC methodologies. Appendix F discusses
additional planning considerations for the development / acquisition phase of the SDLC.
Appendix G provides an additional graphical view of security integration in the SDLC.




                                                    3
CHAPTER TWO

OVERVIEW OF INFORMATION SECURITY AND THE SYSTEM
DEVELOPMENT LIFE CYCLE FUNDAMENTALS


I
    nformation system security processes and
    activities provide valuable input into
    managing IT systems and their development,
enabling risk identification, planning and
mitigation. A risk management approach 1
involves continually balancing the protection of
agency information and assets with the cost of
security controls and mitigation strategies
throughout the complete information system
development life cycle (see Figure 2-1). The
most effective way to implement risk
management is to identify critical assets and
operations, as well as systemic vulnerabilities
across the agency. Risks are shared and not
bound by organization, revenue source, or
topologies. Identification and verification of
critical assets and operations and their
interconnections can be achieved through the                FIGURE 2-1. POSITIONING SECURITY
                                                                    CONSIDERATIONS
system security planning process, as well as
through the compilation of information from the Capital Planning and Investment Control
(CPIC) and Enterprise Architecture (EA) processes to establish insight into the agency’s vital
business operations, their supporting assets, and existing interdependencies and relationships.
With critical assets and operations identified, the organization can and should perform a business
impact analysis (BIA). The purpose of the BIA is to relate systems and assets with the critical
services they provide and assess the consequences of their disruption. By identifying these
systems, an agency can manage security effectively by establishing priorities. This positions the
security office to facilitate the IT program’s cost-effective performance as well as articulate its
business impact and value to the agency.

Executing a risk management-based approach for systems and projects means integrating
security early and throughout the agency’s established system and CPIC life cycles. Integration
enables security to be planned, acquired, built in, and deployed as an integral part of a project or
system. It plays a significant role in measuring and enforcing security requirements throughout
the phases of the life cycle.

Life cycle management helps document security-relevant decisions and provides assurance to
management that security was fully considered in all phases. System managers can use this
information as a self-check reminder of why decisions were made so that the impact of changes
in the environment can be more readily assessed. Oversight and independent audit groups can

1
    NIST Draft Special Publication 800-39, Managing Risk from Information Systems: An Organizational Perspective,
    describes a framework for building an information system security risk management program.



                                                         4
use this information in their reviews to verify that system management has done an adequate job
and to highlight areas where security may have been overlooked. This includes examining
whether the documentation accurately reflects how the system is actually being operated and
maintained.

There are many SDLC methodologies that can be used by an organization to effectively develop
an information system. A traditional SDLC, a linear sequential model (also known as waterfall
method), assumes that the system will be delivered in its final stages of the development life
cycle. Another SDLC method uses the prototyping model, which is often used to develop an
understanding of system requirements without actually developing a final operational system.
More complex systems may require more iterative development models. More complex models
have been developed and successfully used to address the evolving complexity of advanced and
sometimes large information system designs. Examples of these more complex models are the
rapid application development (RAD) model, the joint application development (JAD) model,
the prototyping model, and the spiral model. The expected size and complexity of the system,
development schedule, and length of a system’s life will affect the choice of which SDLC model
to use. In many cases, the choice of the SDLC model will be defined by an organization’s
acquisition policy. Appendix E provides an overview of other SDLC methodologies.

This guide incorporates security into the linear sequential model of SDLC, because this model is
the simplest of the various models, and it is an appropriate platform for this discussion. However,
the concepts discussed can be adapted to any SDLC model.


2.1 Establishing a Common Understanding

2.1.1 Agency SDLC Policy and Guideline
Each agency should have a documented and repeatable SDLC policy and guideline that supports
its business needs and complements its unique culture. The agency SDLC guideline can be
granular in nature or more objective in focus depending on the agency’s IT management style,
complexity of needs, and procurement preference. For example, some agencies maintain a
development operation that builds and maintains systems while others outsource development
and potentially maintenance as well. The former may require a more detailed procedure, while
procurement-centric operations may need only objectives, service levels, and deliverables
detailed. Procurement-centric operations have unique sets of vulnerabilities due to the potential
unknowns and uncontrollable nature of supply chains. These vulnerabilities should be
understood and factored into any risk-based decisions.

A typical SDLC includes five phases: initiation, development/acquisition, 2
implementation/assessment, operations/maintenance, and disposal. Each phase includes a
minimum set of security tasks needed to effectively incorporate security in the system
development process. Note that phases may continue to be repeated throughout a system’s life
prior to disposal.


2
    This publication does not provide an exhaustive description of the acquisition processes. Organizations should
    refer to the appropriate Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR) and organization-specific policies and procedures
    for detailed acquisition information.



                                                          5
 • Initiation. During the initiation phase, the need for a system is expressed and the purpose of
     the system is documented.
 • Development/Acquisition. During this phase, the system is designed, purchased,
     programmed, developed, or otherwise constructed.
 • Implementation/Assessment. After system acceptance testing, the system is installed or
     fielded.
 • Operation/Maintenance. During this phase, the system performs its work. The system is
     almost always modified by the addition of hardware and software and by numerous other
     events.
 • Disposal. Activities conducted during this phase ensure the orderly termination of the system,
     safeguarding vital system information, and migrating data processed by the system to a
     new system, or preserving it in accordance with applicable records management regulations
     and policies.
The SDLC guideline provides utility by documenting:

 • insight into the major activities and milestones;

 • decision points or control gates;

 • specified outputs that provide vital information into system design;

 • project accomplishments; and

 • system maintenance, security, and operational considerations.

The guideline should support, and be supported by, the agency’s mission processes, enterprise
architecture, and financial processes.


2.1.2 Introduction to Security Integration
Executing a risk management-based approach for systems and projects means integrating
security into the agency’s established system development and CPIC life cycles. An integrated
security component (composed of milestones, deliverables, control gates, and interdependencies)
that specifically addresses risk management (discussed in the next section) enables security to be
planned, acquired, built in, and deployed as an integral part of a project or system. It also plays a
significant role in measuring and enforcing security requirements throughout the life cycle. Full
and effective integration within the SDLC enables information security professionals, partnered
with CPIC, IT and EA representatives, to promote effective management and oversight of
security considerations throughout the life cycle.

Implementing information security early in the project allows the requirements to mature as
needed and in an integrated and cost-effective manner. Engineering security into a product’s
initiation phase typically costs less than acquiring technologies later that may need to be
reconfigured, customized or may provide more or fewer security controls than required. Security
should be included during the requirements generation of any project. Designing a solution with
consideration for security could substantially reduce the need for additive security controls (e.g.,


                                                  6
designing a house with two doors versus four requires less point-of-entry security, and wiring the
house for a security system and electricity at the same time precludes tearing holes in the walls
later). This also allows for security planning at an enterprise level that allows reuse, decreases
cost and schedule development, and promotes security reliability.

                                         Implementer’s Tip
Security activities should be physically and logically integrated into the agency’s SDLC policy
and guidelines versus maintaining them in a separate, complementary document or security life
cycle. This ensures a wider audience and decreases the need for the reader to reference multiple
documents unnecessarily. Of course, security integration can and should reference supplemental
process documents that provide further details.
The most effective way to accomplish the integration of security within the system development
life cycle is to plan and implement a comprehensive risk management program (see section
2.1.5). This results in integrated security costs and requirements as well as an embedded,
repeated authorization process that provides risk information to IT stakeholders and developers
throughout the agency.


2.1.3 Capital Planning & Investment Control Process
Each agency has an established and documented CPIC process in line with OMB Circular A-11.
NIST SP 800-65, Integrating IT Security into the Capital Planning and Investment Control
Process, further articulates the integration and value of security. This guideline seeks to continue
this discussion with a focus on security integration within the SDLC.

Key concepts from NIST SP 800-65 that should be considered when reading this guideline
include:

 • The CPIC process is defined by OMB Circular A-130 as “a management process for ongoing
     identification, selection, control, and evaluation of investments in information resources.
     The process links budget formulation and execution, and is focused on agency missions
     and achieving specific program outcomes.” Integrating security into this process ensures
     that information resources are planned and provided in a thorough, disciplined manner,
     enabling improved security for IT investments.
 • Integrating security into the CPIC process consists of a seven-step methodology to ensure
     that mission and security requirements are met throughout the investment life cycle.
 • While specific roles and responsibilities will vary from agency to agency, involvement at the
     enterprise and operating unit levels throughout the process allows agencies to ensure that
     capital planning and information security goals and objectives are met.
 • In concert with the OMB capital planning and NIST guidelines, agencies are required to
     adhere to the Government Accountability Office’s (GAO) best practices, three-phase
     investment life-cycle model for federal IT investments.
 • Costs associated with implementing and assessing information security controls and ensuring
     effective protection of federal IT resources should be accounted for in the capital planning
     process.



                                                 7
2.1.4 Security Architectures
Security architectures should be in line with NIST guidelines consisting of security control
families outlined in NIST SP 800-53 with regard to protecting the confidentiality, integrity, and
availability of federal information and information systems. A comprehensive security
architecture acknowledges current security services, tools and expertise, outlines forecasted
business needs and requirements, and clearly articulates an implementation plan aligned with the
agency’s culture and strategic plans. Usually, the security architecture is supplemented with an
integrated schedule of tasks that identifies expected outcomes (indications and triggers for
further review/alignment), establishes project timelines, provides estimates of resource
requirements, and identifies key project dependencies.


2.1.5 Role in the NIST Risk Management Framework
NIST SP 800-64 complements the Risk Management Framework by providing a sample
roadmap for integrating security functionality and assurance into the SDLC. In addition, this
publication provides further detail on additional activities that are valuable for consideration
given that each system and agency culture varies. These additional activities supplement the risk
management framework. A more detailed description of the NIST Risk Management Framework
is presented in NIST Draft SP 800-39, Managing Risk from Information Systems: An
Organizational Perspective.


2.2 Legacy System Considerations
In many cases, organizations will be applying information security life cycle considerations to
legacy information systems that have been in operation for some extended period of time. Some
legacy systems may have excellent security plans that provide comprehensive documentation of
the risk management decisions that have been made, including identifying the security controls
currently employed. Other legacy systems may have limited documentation available. The
security considerations, however, are still relevant to these legacy systems, and should be applied
and documented to ensure security controls are in place and functioning effectively to provide
adequate protections for the information and the information system.

                                        Implementer’s Tip
Effective communication of security requirements and expectations is a vital and challenging
step. The key is to document the security requirement in specific and measurable terms so that it
clearly identifies who has the responsibility and accountability. The medium (memorandum,
agreement, or expectation document) as well as the granularity and complexity should be
manageable and cost-effective. This is a topic discussed throughout this publication.

2.3 Key Roles and Responsibilities in the SDLC
Many participants have a role in information system development. The names for the roles and
titles will vary among organizations. Not every participant works on every activity within a
phase. The determination of which participants need to be consulted in each phase is as unique to
the organization as the development. With any development project, it is important to involve
appropriate information security personnel as early as possible, preferably in the initiation phase.
A list of key roles is provided below. In some organizations, a single individual may hold
multiple roles.


                                                 8
                        TABLE 2-1. KEY SECURITY ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES IN SDLC

           Role                                                      Responsibilities
Authorizing Official (AO)    An AO is a senior official or executive with the authority to formally assume responsibility for
                             operating an information system at an acceptable level of risk to organization operations and
                             assets, individuals, other organizations, and the Nation. To do this, the AO relies primarily on:
                             (i) the completed security plan; (ii) the security assessment report; and (iii) the plan of action and
                             milestones for reducing or eliminating information system vulnerabilities.
Chief Information Officer    The CIO is responsible for the organization’s information system planning, budgeting,
(CIO)                        investment, performance, and acquisition. As such, the CIO provides advice and assistance to
                             senior organization personnel in acquiring the most efficient and effective information system to
                             fit the organization’s enterprise architecture.
Configuration                The CM manager is responsible for managing the effects of changes or differences in
Management (CM)              configurations on an information system or network. Thus, the CM manager assists in
Manager                      streamlining change management processes and prevents changes that could detrimentally
                             affect the security posture of a system before they happen.
Contracting Officer          The Contracting Officer is the person who has the authority to enter into, administer, and/or
                             terminate contracts and make related determinations and findings.
Contracting Officer’s        The COTR is a qualified employee appointed by the Contracting Officer to act as their technical
Technical Representative     representative in managing the technical aspects of a contract.
Information System           The Information System Security Officer is responsible for ensuring the security of an
Security Officer             information system throughout its life cycle.
Information Technology       The Information Technology (IT) Investment Board, or its equivalent, is responsible for
Investment Board (or         managing the CPIC process defined by the Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996 (Section 5).
equivalent)
Legal Advisor/Contract       The legal advisor is responsible for advising the team on legal issues during the acquisition
Attorney                     process.
Privacy Officer              The privacy officer is responsible for ensuring that the services or system being procured meet
                             existing privacy policies regarding protection, dissemination (information sharing and exchange),
                             and information disclosure.
Program Manager /            This person represents business and programmatic interests in the information system during
Official (Information        the SDLC process. The program manager plays an essential role in security and is, ideally,
Owner)                       intimately aware of functional system requirements.
QA/Test Director             The QA/Test Director is responsible for system test and evaluation, and functions as a resource
                             across a variety of programs by assisting in the development and execution of test plans in
                             conjunction with Program Managers and customers. This person reviews system specifications
                             and determines test needs, and works with Program Managers to plan activities leading up to
                             field test activities.
Senior Agency Information    The SAISO, also known as Chief Information Security Officer, is responsible for promulgating
Security Officer (SAISO)     policies on security integration in the SDLC and developing enterprise standards for information
                             security. This individual plays a leading role in introducing an appropriate structured
                             methodology to help identify, evaluate, and minimize information security risks to the
                             organization.
Software Developer           The developer is responsible for programmatic coding regarding applications, software, and
                             Internet/intranet sites, including “secure coding,” as well as coordinating and working with the
                             Configuration Management (CM) manager to identify, resolve, and implement controls and other
                             CM issues.
System Architect             As the overall designer and integrator of the application, the system architect is responsible for
                             creating the overall design architecture and for maintaining the conceptual integrity of the
                             architecture throughout the project life cycle. The System Architect is also responsible for
                             ensuring the quality of technical work products delivered by the project team, including designs,
                             specifications, procedures, and documentation.
System Owner                 The system owner is responsible for the procurement, development, integration, modification,



                                                               9
          Role                                            Responsibilities
                     operation, and maintenance of an information system.
Other Participants   The list of SDLC roles in an information system development can grow as the complexity
                     increases. It is vital that all development team members work together to ensure that a
                     successful development is achieved. Because information security officials must make critical
                     decisions throughout the development process, they should be included as early as possible in
                     the process. System users may assist in the development by helping the program manager to
                     determine the need, refine the requirements, and inspect and accept the delivered system.
                     Participants may also include personnel who represent IT, configuration management, design
                     and engineering, and facilities groups.




                                                    10
CHAPTER THREE

INCORPORATING SECURITY INTO THE SDLC


T
      his section describes a number of security considerations that will help integrate
      information security into the SDLC. Security considerations are identified in each SDLC
      phase, thus advancing the business application and security requirements together to
ensure a balanced approach during development. Figure 3-1, organized by development phase,
provides an overall view of the process.




                            FIGURE 3-1. THE SDLC – A CONCEPTUAL VIEW
In order to provide clear, concise guidance to the reader, each life cycle phase is described in a
section below that has been organized in this manner:

 • Provides a brief description of the SDLC phase.

 • Identifies general control gates, or established points in the life cycle, when the system will
   be evaluated and when management will determine whether the project should continue as is,
   change direction, or be discontinued. Control gates should be flexible and tailored to the
   specific organization. Control gates are valuable in that they provide the organization with
   the opportunity to verify that security considerations are being addressed, adequate security



                                                 11
 is being built in, and identified risks are clearly understood before the system development
 advances to the next life cycle phase.
• Identifies and describes major security activities in each phase. Each activity is then further
 defined in the following areas:

— Description. The description provides a detailed overview of the activity and highlights
   specific considerations necessary to address the task.
— Expected Outputs. Common task deliverables and artifacts are listed along with
   suggestions for forward/backward integration of these work products into the SDLC.
— Synchronization. A feedback loop that provides opportunities to ensure that the SDLC is
   implemented as a flexible approach that allows for appropriate and consistent
   communication and the adaptation of tasks and deliverables as the system is developed.
— Interdependencies. This section identifies key interdependencies with other tasks to ensure
   that security integration activities are not negatively impacted by other IT processes.




                                               12
3.1 SDLC Phase: Initiation




               FIGURE 3-2. RELATING SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN INITIATION PHASE


3.1.1 Description
During this first phase of the development life cycle, security considerations are key to diligent
and early integration, thereby ensuring that threats, requirements, and potential constraints in
functionality and integration are considered. At this point, security is looked at more in terms of
business risks with input from the information security office. For example, an agency may
identify a political risk resulting from a prominent website being modified or made unavailable
during a critical business period, resulting in decreased trust by citizens. Key security activities
for this phase include:

 • Initial delineation of business requirements in terms of confidentiality, integrity, and
     availability;
 • Determination of information categorization and identification of known special handling
     requirements to transmit, store, or create information such as personally identifiable
     information; and
 • Determination of any privacy requirements.

Early planning and awareness will result in cost and timesaving through proper risk management
planning. Security discussions should be performed as part of (not separately from) the
development project to ensure solid understandings among project personnel of business
decisions and their risk implications to the overall development project.


                                                 13
3.1.2 Control Gates
General types of control gates for this phase may include:

 • A determination of the acquisition strategy to be used throughout the remainder of the
     development process;
 • A system concept review that verifies that the concept is viable, complete, achievable, and in
     line with organizational mission objectives and budgetary constraints;
 • A performance specification review that ensures that the initial system design has addressed
     all currently identified specified security requirements;
 • An enterprise architecture (EA) alignment that harmonizes IT vision, standards, and business
     requirements, as well as security alignment with current and imminent security services;
 • A financial review that verifies that the system will be aligned with CPIC artifacts and
     guidance while balancing the cost implications associated with risk management; and
 • A risk management review that conforms to the recommended NIST risk management
     framework guidelines to reduce ambiguity in managing system risk. Included in this risk
     management review is a review of the information system security categorization results,
     which include identified information types, resulting impact levels, and the final system
     security categorization.

3.1.3 Major Security Activities

3.1.3.1 Initiate Security Planning
                      Security planning should begin in the initiation phase by:
                      •   Identifying key security roles for the system development;
                      •   Identifying sources of security requirements, such as relevant laws, regulations, and
                            standards;
                      • Ensuring all key stakeholders have a common understanding, including security implications,
                            considerations, and requirements; and
                      • Outlining initial thoughts on key security milestones including time frames or development
                            triggers that signal a security step is approaching.
                      This early involvement will enable the developers to plan security requirements and associated
                      constraints into the project. It also reminds project leaders that many decisions being made have
                      security implications that should be weighed appropriately, as the project continues.
     Description:
                      Identification of Security Roles
                      Identification of the ISSO is an important step that should take into consideration the amount of
                      time the individual will devote to this task, the skills needed to perform the duties, and the
                      capability the individual has to effectively carry out the responsibilities.
                      Identifying the ISSO early in the process provides the individual key insights into risk-based
                      decisions made early in the process and provides the other team members access to the ISSO
                      for support in integrating security into the system development.
                      Stakeholder Security Integration Awareness
                      The ISSO provides the business owner and developer with an early understanding of the security
                      steps, requirements, and expectations so security can be planned from the beginning. Topics
                      may include:



                                                       14
                              •    Security Responsibilities
                              •    Security Reporting Metrics
                              •    Common Security Controls Provided (if applicable)
                              •    Certification & Accreditation Process
                              •    Security Testing and Assessment Techniques
                              •    Security Document & Requirement Deliverables
                              •    Secure Design, Architecture, and Coding Practices
                              •    Security Acquisition Considerations
                              •    Major activities with development schedule and resource impact such as active testing,
                                     accreditation, and training
                               Initial Project Planning
                               Developing an initial project outline for security milestones that is integrated into the development
                               project schedule will allow proper planning as changes occur. At this stage, activities may be
                               more in terms of decisions followed by security activities.
                              •   Supporting documents (slides, meeting minutes, etc.)
    Expected Outputs:         •   Common understanding of security expectations.
                              •   Initial schedule of security activities or decisions.

                               A series of milestones or security meetings should be planned to discuss each of the security
     Synchronization:          considerations throughout the system development.


                               A project schedule should integrate security activities to ensure proper planning of any future
    Interdependencies:         decisions associated with schedules and resources.

                                                       Implementer’s Tips
•    Security planning in the initiation phase should include preparations for the entire system life cycle, including the
       identification of key security milestones and deliverables, and tools and technologies. Special consideration should be
       given to items that may need to be procured (e.g., test/assessment tools).
•    Many of the project initiation artifacts (meeting minutes, briefings, role identification) can be standardized and provided to
       developers for proper level-of-effort planning.
•    An in-person meeting allows attendees an important opportunity to gauge understanding and awareness.
•    If the agency identified the same individual ISSO for multiple systems, a planned approach will increase their ability to
       multi-process, such as assigning common systems or common organizations with ownership.
•    Consult with agency Records Management, Privacy, and Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) officials early in the
       development life cycle to ensure compliance with applicable laws and agency policy.

3.1.3.2 Categorize the Information System
                               Security categorization, which corresponds to step 1 in the NIST Risk Management Framework,
                               provides a vital step towards integrating security into the government agencies’ business and
                               information technology management functions and establishes the foundation for security
                               standardization among information systems. Security categorization starts with the identification
                               of what information supports which government lines of business, as defined by the EA and
                               described in NIST Special Publication 800-60, Guide for Mapping Types of Information and
       Description:            Information Systems to Security Categories. Subsequent steps focus on the evaluation of
                               security in terms of confidentiality, integrity, and availability. The result is strong linkage between
                               mission, information, and information systems with cost-effective information security.
                               Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) Publication 199, Standards for Security
                               Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems, provides a standardized
                               approach for establishing security categories for an organization’s information and information
                               systems. NIST SP 800-60, the companion guideline to FIPS 199, provides a process roadmap



                                                                  15
                                and information taxonomy to categorize information and information systems. The security
                                categories are based on the potential impact on an organization should certain events occur that
                                jeopardize the information systems needed by the organization to accomplish its assigned
                                mission, protect its assets, fulfill its legal responsibilities, maintain its day-to-day functions, and
                                protect individuals. Security categories are to be used in conjunction with vulnerability and threat
                                information in assessing the risk to an organization by operating an information system. FIPS
                                Publication 199 defines three levels (i.e., low, moderate, or high) of potential impact on
                                organizations or individuals should there be a breach of security (a loss of confidentiality,
                                integrity, or availability). The security categorization standards and guidelines assist
                                organizations in making the appropriate selection of security controls for their information
                                systems.
                                • Security Categorization - Essential to the security categorization process is documenting the
                                     research, key decisions, and supporting rationale for the information system security
                                     categorization (this is included in the System Security Plan).
                                • High-Level Security Requirements
        Expected Outputs:
                                • Level of Effort Estimates - Initial level of effort can be derived from applying the resulting
                                     security categorization to the minimal security controls in NIST SP 800-53, and assessment
                                     procedures in NIST SP 800-53A, Guide for Assessing the Security Controls in Federal
                                     Information Systems.

                                The security categorization should be revisited if there are significant changes to the information
         Synchronization:       system or when the business impact analysis is updated.

                                •   Business Impact Analysis: Agency personnel should consider the cross-utilization of security
                                      categorization and Business Impact Analysis (BIA) information in the performance of each
                                      task activity. Since these activities have common objectives, agencies should mutually draw
                                      on these activities for each information system and use the results to ensure accuracy.
                                •   CPIC and EA: Just as no IT investment should be made without a business-approved
                                      architecture, 3 the security categorization at the start of the security life cycle is a business-
                                      enabling activity directly feeding the EA and CPIC processes as well as migration and
                                      upgrade decisions.
                                •   System Design: Understanding and designing the system architecture with varying impact
                                      levels in mind may assist in achieving economies of scale with security services and
        Interdependencies:            protection through common security zones within the enterprise. This type of approach
                                      requires a solid understanding of an agency’s information and data types gained through the
                                      security categorization process.
                                •   Contingency and Disaster Recovery Planning: Contingency and disaster recovery planning
                                      personnel should review information systems that have multiple data types of varying impact
                                      levels and consider grouping applications with similar system-impact levels with sufficiently
                                      protected infrastructures. This ensures efficient application of the correct contingency and
                                      disaster protection security controls and avoids the over protection of lower-impact systems.
                                •   Information Sharing and System Interconnection Agreements: Agency personnel should
                                      utilize aggregated and individual security categorization information when assessing
                                      interagency connections.
                                                         Implementer’s Tips
    • To enable an appropriate level of mission support and the diligent implementation of current and future information
       security requirements, each agency should establish a formal process to validate system-level categorizations in terms of
       agency priorities. This will not only promote comparable evaluation of systems, but also yield added benefits to include
       leveraging common security controls and establishing defense-in-depth.
    • Agency personnel should review the appropriateness of the provisional impact levels in the context of the organization,
       environment, mission, use, and connectivity associated with the information system under review, to include: the


3
    FEA Consolidated Reference Model Document, Version 2.1, December 2006.



                                                                   16
   agency’s mission importance; life cycle and timeliness implications; configuration and security policy-related information;
   special handling requirements; etc., and make adjustments if necessary.
• Even though information system security categorization may result in moderate- or high-impact system identification, the
   individual SP 800-53 security controls prescribed for confidentiality, integrity, and/or availability may be set at the high
   water mark identified for the individual security objective if the controls are truly independent and if cost or other concerns
   are a significant driver. For the latter, a risk management approach to the selection of security controls should be
   followed and any justifiable variances documented in the information systems security plan.
• Agency personnel should be aware that there are several factors that should be considered during the aggregation of
   system information types. When considering these factors, previously unforeseen concerns may surface affecting the
   confidentiality, integrity, and/or availability impact categorization at the system level. These factors include data
   aggregation, critical system functionality, extenuating circumstances, and other system factors.

3.1.3.3 Assess Business Impact
                             An assessment of system impact on the agency lines of business correlates specific system
                             components with the critical business services that are provided. That information is then used to
                             characterize the business and mission consequences of a disruption to the system’s
                             components. An initial draft of this product early in the life cycle alerts system stakeholders to key
       Description:          IT and security decisions. This task should also take into account the availability impact level
                             identified during the security categorization task. Refer to NIST SP 800-34, Contingency
                             Planning Guide for Information Technology Systems, for a business impact assessment
                             template.
                             • Identify lines of business supported by this system and how those lines of business will be
                                  impacted;
                             • Identify core system components needed to maintain minimal functionality;
    Expected Outputs:        • Identify the length of time the system can be down before the business is impacted (initial
                                  idea of the needed Recovery Time Objective); and
                             • Identify the business tolerance for loss of data (initial idea of the needed Recovery Point
                                  Objective).
                             • This should be reviewed periodically and updated as major development decisions (such as
                                  new functionalities) occur or the system’s purpose and scope change significantly.
     Synchronization:
                             • As the system matures, the BIA should be augmented with more detail on major IT
                                  components.
                             • The BIA is a key step in the contingency planning process. The BIA enables improved
                                  characterization of the system requirements, processes, and interdependencies and uses
                                  this information to determine contingency requirements and mitigating solutions.
    Interdependencies:
                             • The FIPS 199 Security Categorization activity’s similarity in terms of inputs and purpose
                                  positions it as a complementary activity that provides checks and balances to ensure that all
                                  business drivers are adequately addressed.
                                                     Implementer’s Tips
• Some of this information can be derived from the original business case for the initiative.
• For larger and more complex developments, consider holding a stakeholders meeting to brainstorm possible linkages and
   impacts.
• Reuse data and information for multiple purposes when applicable. Categorization decisions can be reused for business
   impact assessments (BIA), disaster recovery (DR), contingency planning (CP), and continuity of operations (COOP)
   decisions. Categorization should be reflective of DR priorities. If not, there is potential that categorization was not
   conducted at an appropriate level or DR priorities are incorrect.
• The results of a BIA can be used to develop requirements or objectives for service-level agreements (SLAs) with
   supporting service providers.

3.1.3.4 Assess Privacy Impact
       Description:          When developing a new system, it is important to directly consider if the system will transmit,



                                                               17
                            store, or create information that may be considered privacy information. This typically is identified
                            during the security categorization process when identifying information types. Once identified as
                            a system under development that will likely handle privacy information, the system owner should
                            work towards identifying and implementing proper safeguards and security controls, including
                            processes to address privacy information incident handling and reporting requirements.
                            Many agencies have employed either a one- or two-step model to address privacy
                            considerations. The one-step model requires all systems on the agency’s system inventory to
                            develop a privacy impact assessment that outlines criteria for privacy information determination
                            and documents security controls employed to properly protect the information. In contrast, the
                            two-step model differentiates by processing all systems through a threshold analysis, which is
                            focused on whether a privacy impact assessment should be performed. A positive answer would
                            then result in the execution of a more detailed evaluation of privacy data and proper security
                            controls in the form of a privacy impact assessment.
                            The resulting document of either process would then be incorporated into the system security
                            plan and maintained appropriately.

                            Privacy Impact Assessment providing details on where and to what degree privacy information is
    Expected Outputs:       collected, stored, or created within the system.


                            Should continue to be reviewed and updated as major decisions occur or system purpose and
     Synchronization:       scope change significantly.

                           • A FIPS 199 Security Categorization is the initial step in identifying types of information such
                              as privacy information.
                           • Security controls identification and assessment would reflect whether additional controls are
    Interdependencies:        needed to protect the privacy information.
                           • This will have an impact on the System Security Plan, Contingency Plan, and Business
                              Impact Assessment that may need to be captured in these documents.
                                                    Implementer’s Tips
• Governance for Privacy Information: Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. § 552A
• The E-Government Act of 2002 strengthened privacy protection requirements of the Privacy Act of 1974. Under the terms
   of these public laws, federal government agencies have specific responsibilities regarding collection, dissemination, or
   disclosure of information regarding individuals.
• The September 29, 2003, OMB Memorandum, “OMB Guidance for Implementing the Privacy Provisions of the E-
   Government Act of 2002,” puts the privacy provisions of the E-Government Act of 2002 into effect. The guidance applies
   to information that identifies individuals in a recognizable form, including name, address, telephone number, Social
   Security Number, and e-mail addresses.
• OMB M-06-16 and OMB M-07-17.

3.1.3.5 Ensure Use of Secure Information System Development Processes
                            Primary responsibility for application security, during early phases, lies in the hands of the
                            development team who has the most in-depth understanding of the detailed workings of the
                            application and ability to identify security defects in functional behavior and business process
                            logic. They are the first level of defense and opportunity to build in security. It is important that
                            their role not be assumed or diminished. Communicating and providing expectations is key to
                            planning and enabling an environment that protects down to the code level. Considerations to
       Description:         plan for include:
                                       Secure Concept of Operations (CONOPS) for Development. A concept of
                                       operations document for secure development should be established for the
                                       environment and a contingency plan should be in place for the code repository as
                                       source code is the predominant work product of software and system development and
                                       should be preserved in the event of interruption to the development environment.



                                                              18
                                      Standards and Processes. System development should occur with standard
                                      processes that consider secure practices and are documented and repeatable. To
                                      accomplish this, appropriate security processes for the assurance level required by the
                                      system should be determined and documented. Thus, systems with a high assurance
                                      requirement may need additional security controls built into the development process.
                                      Security Training for Development Team. Additional security training may be needed
                                      for key developers to understand the current threats and potential exploitations of their
                                      products as well as training for secure design and coding techniques. This enables the
                                      developers to create more secure designs and empowers them to address key issues
                                      early in the development processes.
                                      Quality Management. Quality management, which includes planning, assurance and
                                      control, is key to ensuring minimal defects within and proper execution of the
                                      information system. This reduces gaps or holes that are sometimes left open for
                                      exploitation or misuse (whether intentional or not) causing vulnerabilities in the system.
                                      Secure Environment. The system development environment should meet minimum
                                      FISMA compliance criteria as expressed in SP 800-53. This is to include workstations,
                                      servers, network devices, and code repositories. Development environments must be
                                      accredited as would any other operational system or environment. A secure
                                      development environment lends itself to developing secure software and systems.
                                      Secure Code Practices and Repositories. Special attention should be placed upon
                                      code repositories with an emphasis on systems that support distributed code
                                      contribution with check-in/check-out functionality. Role-based access should apply to
                                      accessing the code repository, and logs should be reviewed regularly as part of the
                                      secure development process. Code should be developed in accordance with standard
                                      practices. A necessary part of the aforementioned CONOPS is the establishment and
                                      retention of secure coding patterns and components. Secure coding patterns embody
                                      code level examples and accompanying documentation that illustrate how to meet
                                      specific functional requirements while simultaneously achieving security mandates.
                                      These patterns can then be reused by developers to ensure that all software
                                      components are developed in an assured fashion, having been vetted and adopted by
                                      the organization. When possible, completed software components that have passed
                                      security certification should be retained as reusable components for future software
                                      development and system integration.
                             As a team, system developers and security representatives should agree on what steps can and
                             should be taken to ensure valuable and cost-effective contributions to a secure development
                             environment.
                             •   Plans for development phase security training.
    Expected Outputs:        •   Planned quality assurance techniques, deliverables, and milestones.
                             •   Development and coding standards including development environment.
                             Lessons learned from completed products and security testing should be evaluated for
     Synchronization:        appropriateness in adjusting development processes and standards to prevent embedding
                             weaknesses.
                             • IT development standards should contain appropriate methodologies that add value to the
                                process and do not detract from security.
    Interdependencies:
                             • System development training and orientation should include basic and specialized (to
                                environment) security awareness, training, and education.
                                                    Implementer’s Tips
•    Understanding modern application security defects and attack methods is essential to protecting the system against them.
      Providing application security training to the development and testing teams will increase understanding of the issues
      and techniques and should enable the development of more secure systems. If developers are aware of what to look for
      and what to test during the development phase, the number of security defects developed and released to quality
      assurance (QA) should be reduced. In addition, if the QA test team is well educated in the area of application security,



                                                              19
   they are more likely to identify a security issue before the product is moved on to the next phase of testing. Such training
   should result in greater confidence in the overall security of the production system. Providing training in application
   security will also emphasize the importance of application security to the team.
• Any weakness known by the development team should be addressed as soon as possible. It is unwise to assume that
   complicated attacks requiring significant knowledge of the internal workings of the system are unlikely from malicious
   attackers. On more than one occasion, system owners have been surprised to find that attackers were able to “discover”
   information that the system owners assumed to be hidden.
• To reduce the possibility of security defects in the system, security-focused additions should be investigated and
   incorporated into the existing coding standards or development guideline document. These standards should account for
   all types of software development languages used, such as C++, Java, HTML, JavaScript, and SQL.




                                                              20
3.2 SDLC Phase: Development/Acquisition




   FIGURE 3-3. RELATING SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN THE DEVELOPMENT/ACQUISITION PHASE


3.2.1 Description
This section addresses security considerations unique to the second SDLC phase. Key security
activities for this phase include:

 • Conduct the risk assessment and use the results to supplement the baseline security controls;

 • Analyze security requirements;

 • Perform functional and security testing;

 • Prepare initial documents for system certification and accreditation; and

 • Design security architecture.

Although this section presents the information security components in a sequential top-down
manner, the order of completion is not necessarily fixed. Security analysis of complex systems
will need to be iterated until consistency and completeness is achieved.

3.2.2 Control Gates
General types of control gates for this phase may include:



                                               21
 • An Architecture/Design Review that evaluates the planned system design and potential
     integration with other systems as well as incorporation of shared services and common
     security controls, such as authentication, disaster recovery, intrusion detection, or incident
     reporting.
 • A system Performance Review that evaluates whether the system is delivering, or capable of
     delivering, to the documented expectation of the owner and whether the system behaves in
     a predictable manner if it is subjected to improper use. (For example, the ability of the
     system to maintain availability and data integrity at the expected extreme resource loads.)
 • A system Functional Review that ensures functional requirements identified are sufficiently
     detailed and are testable.
 • Mid-Project Status & Financial Review is important to detect major shifts in planned level of
     effort to ensure cost-benefit ratios are monitored and effective decisions are continued.
 • A follow-on review of risk management decisions may be needed if, due to the
     aforementioned reviews, the system and/or its security controls and/or its requirements
     change.

3.2.3 Major Security Activities

3.2.3.1 Assess Risk to System
                      Agencies should consult NIST SP 800-30, Risk Management Guide for Information Technology
                      Systems, for guidance on conducting risk assessments.
                      The purpose of a risk assessment is to evaluate current knowledge of the system’s design, stated
                      requirements, and minimal security requirements derived from the security categorization process
                      to determine their effectiveness to mitigate anticipated risks. Results should show that specified
                      security controls provide appropriate protections or highlight areas where further planning is
                      needed. To be successful, participation is needed from people who are knowledgeable in the
    Description:      disciplines within the system domain (e.g., users, technology experts, operations experts).
                      The security risk assessment should be conducted before the approval of design specifications as
                      it may result in additional specifications or provide further justification for specifications.
                      In addition to considering the security perspective of the system being developed/ acquired,
                      organizations should also consider how the system might affect other systems to which it will be
                      directly or indirectly connected. This may mean that there are inherited common controls to
                      leverage or additional risks that need to be mitigated. In these cases, an enterprise review may be
                      needed to provide a more comprehensive view of threats and vulnerabilities.
                      A refined risk assessment based on a more mature system design that more accurately reflects
                      the potential risk to the system, known weaknesses in the design, identified project constraints,
 Expected Outputs:    and known threats to both business and IT components. In addition, previous requirements are
                      now transitioning into system specific controls.
                      Since this risk assessment is completed at a more mature stage of system development, there
  Synchronization:    may be a need to revisit previously completed security steps, such as BIA or Security
                      Categorization. Development rarely goes as planned, and requirements have a way of changing.
                      • Security categorization provides the initial risk assessment information based on information
                         types.
 Interdependencies:
                      • Additional security controls or compensating controls may be planned or modified based on the
                         risk assessment to ensure required protection for information and information systems.




                                                        22
                                                     Implementer’s Tips
•    Within any organization, the threat from internal sources remains the highest probability of occurrence. Improprieties by
       employees [system developers] who are also privileged system users are a real threat, especially since such employees
       may have active accounts within the system. Practices should include independent audits of the system and its
       supporting processes. Continuously monitoring internal sources and using integrity-based tools to ensure configuration
       audit and control may be of use by providing an automated central audit log collection, correlation, and analysis tool.
•    It is a good idea to monitor the National Vulnerability Database (http://nvd.nist.gov) for known component vulnerabilities
       and build in controls to mitigate them. These would then need to be tested.
•    When dealing with a system having multiple owners (sometimes across different domains), it is important to identify and
       address shared and inherited risks.
•    Depending on the rigor needed and the complexity of the system, it may be important to follow the data flow/information
       sharing beyond the first interface. Failure to do so may result in inheriting unknown risks.
•    Other inherited risks may be evaluated through the supply of materials for the system. Supply chain risk should be
       understood and evaluated to mitigate potential use of fraudulent, pirated, unlicensed or intentionally compromised
       material.

3.2.3.2 Select and Document Security Controls
                            The selection and documentation of security controls corresponds to step 2 in the NIST Risk
                            Management Framework. The selection of security controls consists of three activities: the
                            selection of baseline security controls (including common security controls); the application of
                            security control tailoring guidance to adjust the initial security control baseline; and the
                            supplementation of the tailored baseline with additional controls based on an assessment of risk
                            and local conditions. An organization-wide view is essential in the security control selection
                            process to ensure that adequate risk mitigation is achieved for all mission/business processes and
                            the information systems and organizational infrastructure supporting those processes. .
                            The security control selection process should include an analysis of laws and regulations, such as
                            FISMA, OMB circulars, agency-enabling acts, agency-specific governance, FIPS and NIST
                            Special Publications, and other legislation and federal regulations that define applicable specifics
                            to the security controls selected.
                            As with other aspects of security, the goal should be cost-effective implementation that meets the
      Description:          requirements for protection of an organization’s information assets. In each situation, a balance
                            should exist between the system security benefits to mission performance and the risks associated
                            with operation of the system.
                            The security controls allocated to individual information systems are documented in the system
                            security plan as described in NIST Special Publication 800-18. Security plans provide an overview
                            of the security requirements for the information systems within an organization and describe the
                            security controls in place, or planned, for meeting those requirements. The plans also describe
                            the rationale for security categorization, tailoring, and supplementation activities, how individual
                            controls are implemented within specific operational environments, and any use restrictions to be
                            enforced on information systems due to high-risk situations. Security plans are important because
                            they document the decisions taken during the security control selection process and the rationale
                            for those decisions. They are approved by appropriate authorizing officials within the organization
                            and provide one of the key documents in security accreditation packages that are instrumental in
                            authorization decisions.

                            •   System Security Plan - specification of security controls that identify which, where, and how
    Expected Outputs:            security controls will be applied.

                            • Security controls and associated specifications should reflect appropriate levels of protection to
                               the system in line with the security control selection criteria.
    Synchronization:        • Significant decisions should consider any possible secondary risks that may result should the
                               decision influence previously considered security controls and protections identified during the
                               risk assessment.



                                                               23
                             • Once formulated, security control requirements will be incorporated into the system security
                                plan.
 Interdependencies:
                             • The risk assessment is a primary tool to identify if the tailored security controls are effective to
                                address an organization’s risk tolerance.
                                                      Implementer’s Tips
•    Addressing security requirements in a matrix format allows the developers and security engineers to review
       implementation per major system component and can facilitate gap analysis, ensuring proper risk analysis and control
       implementation.
•    Information security requirements should be stated in specific terms. For complex systems, iterations of the requirements
       analysis may be needed. If so, planned reviews should occur at major SDLC milestones.
•    Any new functional requirement may have security implications. Introducing additional risk or weakening existing security
       controls is more likely if a specific security analysis is not performed for each added functional requirement. Then it is
       possible for undocumented risk to enter the system.
•    More detailed “attack prevention” requirements will also help to ensure that security controls and methods are tested prior
       to release. If a documented requirement exists, then it is assumed that a test case will need to be developed and
       executed.
•    Security controls are not one-dimensional and should be addressed as appropriately on multiple components throughout
       the system. For example, if your system is composed of SQL servers, Web Sphere, and a mainframe, then assessments
       may need to be planned for all, some, or none, depending on the system. Documenting this during this stage decreases
       the level of effort during testing.
•    Agencies should initiate disposition planning during this phase and plan for disposal/transition throughout all phases of the
       life cycle. This activity is best done as part of the requirements phase so full resource requirements for disposal are
       understood and planned for. Disposition procedures can provide value throughout the life cycle, as hardware and
       software becomes obsolete or damaged in other phases.

3.2.3.3 Design Security Architecture
                             With the increase in shared service providers and the centralization of some key security services
                             within agencies, it is becoming more important to plan these services and understand how they will
                             be integrated into the system.
                             An enterprise alignment of the system should ensure that the initiative fits the agency’s future
                             plans and does not conflict or unnecessarily provide redundant services. In addition, as the system
                             matures and more decisions are made as to services utilized, the EA should be reviewed for
                             optimal integration.
                             At the system level, security should be architected and then engineered into the design of the
                             system. This may be accomplished by zoning or clustering services either together or distributed
                             for either redundancy or additional layers of protection. Security designing at the system level
                             should take into consideration services obtained externally, planned system interconnections, and
                             the different orientations of system users (e.g., customer service versus system administrators).
      Description:           Another example would be a system auditing strategy that should be developed to enable an
                             accurate trace or reconstruction of all priority and high-risk work flows. The audit strategy should
                             include various audit records from several different components including (but not limited to) the
                             Web application, databases, mainframe, and Web servers. The goal should not be to capture as
                             much audit information as possible but to capture only what is needed to provide enough
                             information to investigate potential security breaches and system failures.
                             This activity may be performed when reviewing from an IT development view the known
                             bottlenecks and single points of failures.
                             Minimal security requirements as well as requirements and constraints determined early in the
                             process should provide the architects with a set of assumptions and constraints to build around.
                             This activity can provide the most value for the system in lowering the total cost of ownership by
                             planning the systems core components in a secure way.
                             • Schematic of security integration providing details on where, within the system, security is
    Expected Outputs:
                                  implemented and shared. Security architectures should be graphically depicted and detailed



                                                                 24
                                 to the extent the reader can see where the core security controls are applied and how.
                           •   Listing of shared services and resulting shared risk.
                           •   Identification of common controls used by the system.
                           •   The security architecture becomes a key component of the system documentation that should
                                 be reviewed and maintained as major changes or significant control gates (milestones) are
    Synchronization:             reached.
                           •   Significant results from assessments, security testing, and reviews should be examined for
                                 potential feedback on effectiveness.
                           •   Enterprise Architecture should provide insights into other like systems or services where
                                 integration is optimal.
                           •   System security plans will document the summary of the security architecture approach or
                                 strategy.
 Interdependencies:
                           •   Security requirements analysis will provide the majority of the information at the detailed level.
                                 This will enable the architect to review the information, apply it theoretically at the system
                                 level, and determine if the controls will work as intended or if there are gaps or unnecessary
                                 redundancy.
                                                    Implementer’s Tips
• Security architecting can provide effective compensating controls when there are issues with implementing minimal
   security requirements with the system’s design specification. Security architectures will also identify common controls
   that the system will inherit as well as who has responsibility for those common controls.
• Demonstrating the logic behind the security of this system will help in determining the need for additional controls.
• Risks accepted by the system that may have downstream, adverse affects on the enterprise can be identified and raised
   as issues during the architectural review. Enterprise risk culminating from all individual system risk should be expressed
   and tracked through the agency Enterprise Architecture process.

3.2.3.4 Engineer in Security and Develop Controls
                           During this stage, security controls are implemented and become part of the system rather than
                           applied at completion. Applying security controls in development should be considered carefully
                           and planned logically. The intent is to integrate the controls so that challenges with system
                           performance are known early. Additionally, some security controls may limit or hinder normal
                           development activities.
                           For new information systems, the security requirements identified and described in the respective
                           system security plans are now designed, developed, and implemented. The system security plans
      Description:         for operational information systems may require the development of additional security controls to
                           supplement in-place controls or the modification of controls that are deemed to be less than
                           effective.
                           During this task, decisions are made based on integration challenges and trade-offs. It is important
                           to document the major decisions and their business/technology drivers. In cases where the
                           application of a planned control is not possible or advisable, compensating controls should be
                           considered and documented.
                           •   Implemented controls with documented specification for inclusion into the security plan.
    Expected Outputs:      •   List of security control variations resulting from development decisions and tradeoffs.
                           •   Potential assessment scenarios to test known vulnerabilities or limitations.

                           Security control application may undergo changes as a result of functional and user testing.
    Synchronization:       Changes should be documented.

                           •   Security requirements analysis should be reviewed and updated if change is needed.
 Interdependencies:        •   Security architecture strategy should be reviewed and updated if change is needed.
                           •   Specific configurations should be documented or referenced in the system security plan.




                                                               25
                                                      Implementer’s Tips
Documenting security deviations from initial security requirements at this stage will encourage solid risk planning and reduce
time later in backtracking business justifications. In addition, it demonstrates evidence of risk planning.

3.2.3.5 Develop Security Documentation
                            While the most prominent document is the System Security Plan, documentation supporting it may
                            include:
                            • Configuration management plan
                            • Contingency plan (including a Business Impact Assessment)
                            • Continuous monitoring plan
                            • Security awareness, training and education (SATE) plan
                            • Incident response plan
                            • Privacy impact assessment (PIA)
                            Development of these documents should consider the maturity of the security services being
      Description:          documented. In some cases, these documents may contain only known requirements, common
                            controls, and templates. Filling in these documents should begin as early as possible during the
                            project.
                            At this stage, it is important to solidify the security approach, the proper scope, and an
                            understanding of responsibilities. For example, the DR plan may be covered by the connected
                            General Support System, and SATE may be outsourced to a shared service provider. In this case,
                            the plans may focus on the system specifics and may reference key points from an in-place
                            service-level agreement.
                            Documenting as the system development progresses can provide cost savings and enhance
                            decision-making capabilities through a comprehensive approach that allows early detection of
                            gaps.

    Expected Outputs:       •   Additional security documentation supporting the system security plan.


                            These documents will need to be updated toward the end of user acceptance testing to ensure
    Synchronization:        that they are accurate.

                            •   System security documentation should align with:
                                o Security requirements analysis
 Interdependencies:             o Security architecture
                                o Business impact assessment, and
                                o Security categorization.
                                                      Implementer’s Tips
• Security operations should not be driven by documentation of compliance but based on system need and described in
   compliance with security guidance.
• For major systems that are large in size, complex in design, or politically sensitive, it is best to assign a point of contact
   POC) to each document and initiate development with a meeting on the document’s scope, expectations, and level of
   granularity.

3.2.3.6 Conduct Testing (Developmental, Functional and Security)
                            Systems being developed or undergoing software, hardware, and/or communication
                            modification(s) must be tested and evaluated prior to being implemented. The objective of the test
      Description:
                            and evaluation process is to validate that the developed system complies with the functional and
                            security requirements. Testing of security controls is based on technical security specifications for



                                                                26
                             those controls supplemented by the assessment procedures detailed in NIST SP 800-53A, Guide
                             for Assessing the Security Controls in Federal Information Systems.
                             The process focuses on specificity, repeatability, and iteration. For specificity, the testing must be
                             scoped to test the relevant security requirement as it is intended for use in its environment. For
                             repeatability, the testing process must be capable of the execution of a series of tests against an
                             information system more than once (or against similar systems in parallel) and yield similar results
                             each time. For iteration, each system will be required to execute functional tests in whole or in part
                             a number of successive times in order to achieve an acceptable level of compliance with the
                             requirements of the system. To achieve this, functional testing will be automated to the degree
                             possible, and the test cases will be published, in detail, to ensure that the test process is
                             repeatable and iterative. The use of automated testing tools and integration of the NIST Security
                             Content Automation Protocol (SCAP) should be accomplished prior to the commencement of
                             security control test and evaluation activities. Any security functionality not tested during the
                             functional or automated testing will be carefully examined to ensure compliance with the
                             requirements during the explicit security control test and evaluation.
                             Only test or “stub” data should be used during system development. Absolutely no operational,
                             security-relevant, or personally identifiable information (PII) should reside within any system or
                             software during development.

    Expected Outputs:        Documentation of test results, including any unexpected variations discovered during testing.


                             All test results are returned to developers for configuration-managed updates. Unexpected results
    Synchronization:         may require the customer to clarify the nature of the requirement.

                             •   Security requirements analysis may be impacted and require updating.
Interdependencies:           •   Changes may impact the security architecture and require updating.
                             •   The system risk assessment may need updating to accurately reflect current mitigations.
                                                      Implementer’s Tips
•    In an effort to reduce redundant functional and security testing activities, it is recommended that functional test plans
       include general security features testing (to the greatest extent possible).
•    Preliminary testing of basic security controls during functional testing may reduce or eliminate issues earlier in the
       development cycle (e.g., mandatory access controls, secure code development, and firewalls). Preliminary testing is
       considered development-level testing, not certification and accreditation (C&A) testing but if no changes occur, reuse test
       results to the maximum extent possible in the C&A.
•    For systems of high visibility and sensitivity, independent development testing may be recommended.
•    Preliminary testing enables cost and schedule risk mitigation.
•    Preliminary testing may be done at component or security zone level to ensure that each component or security zone is
       secure as an entity.
•    Capture the process and results of all security testing that occurs throughout the life cycle for evaluation, issue
       identification, and potential reuse.
•    Source code should be periodically reviewed using automated tools or manual spot check for common programming
       errors that have a detrimental impact on system security including: cross-site scripting vulnerabilities, buffer overflows,
       race conditions, object model violations, poor user input validation, poor error handling, exposed security parameters,
       passwords in the clear, and violations of stated security policy, models, or architecture as part of the software
       development QA process.




                                                                27
3.3 SDLC Phase: Implementation / Assessment




  FIGURE 3-4. RELATING SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN THE IMPLEMENTATION/ASSESSMENT PHASE


3.3.1 Description
Implementation/Assessment is the third phase of the SDLC. During this phase, the system will
be installed and evaluated in the organization’s operational environment.

Key security activities for this phase include:

 • Integrate the information system into its environment;

 • Plan and conduct system certification activities in synchronization with testing of security
     controls; and
 • Complete system accreditation activities.


3.3.2 Control Gates
General types of control gates for this phase may include:

 • System Test Readiness Review

 • C&A Review




                                                  28
    • Final Project Status and Financial Review

    • Deployment Readiness Review

    • Authorizing Official (AO) Decision

    • IT Deployment or Connection Approval.


3.3.3 Major Security Activities

3.3.3.1 Create a Detailed Plan for C&A
                           Because the Authorizing Official (AO) is responsible for accepting the risk of operating the system,
                           the AO can advise the development team if the risks associated with eventual operation of the
                           system appear to be unacceptable. Specifications can impose excessive burden and costs if the
                           acceptable residual risks are not known. The involvement of the AO is required for this
                           determination of acceptable residual risks. It is easier to incorporate requirement changes during
                           the planning stage of a system acquisition than during the solicitation, source selection, or contract
                           administration stages.
                           The development team and the AO should also discuss the forms of evidence that the AO needs
                           to make a decision. This evidence may include system test results and other data. In addition, the
      Description:         acquisition initiator and the accrediting official should discuss how changes to the system and its
                           environment would be addressed. The possibility of establishing a security working group should
                           be discussed. Such a group may consist of personnel such as users, program managers, and
                           application sponsors; system, security, or database administrators; security officers or specialists,
                           including the C&A representatives; and system or application analysts.
                           To ensure proper testing and reduce the likelihood of scope creep during testing, the security
                           accreditation boundary should be clearly delineated. This will form the basis for the test plan to be
                           created and approved prior to implementation performance.
                           At this point, the certification package should be close to completion, and any agency-specified
                           initial review for conformance has commenced.
                           •   Initial Work Plan: A planning document that identifies key players, project constraints, core
    Expected Outputs:            components, scope of testing, and level of expected rigor. The certification package should
                                 be close to completion, and any initial agency-specified conformance reviews initiated.

                           ISSO provides the system owner with completed documentation required to initiate and conduct
    Synchronization:       C&A. The AO is notified.

                           Security Controls Assessment Plan will derive the foundational information from this planning
 Interdependencies:        document/session.
                                                    Implementer’s Tips
• Holding a planning session or completing a preliminary project plan four - six weeks prior to testing will allow enough time
    to obtain resources and plan appropriately.
• Holding a quick initial review of the certification package will help bring to light potential challenges.
• Active testing will impact development and should be planned well ahead of this meeting.
• Involving the AO in the planning process as early as possible (even in phase 1) will establish expectations for C&A and
    eliminate surprises prior to reaching the C&A control gate.




                                                              29
3.3.3.2 Integrate Security into Established Environments or Systems
                            System integration occurs at the operational site when the information system is to be deployed for
                            operation. Integration and acceptance testing occur after information system delivery and
      Description:          installation. Security control settings are enabled in accordance with manufacturers’ instructions,
                            available security implementation guidance, and documented security specification.

                           •    Verified list of operational security controls.
    Expected Outputs:
                           •    Completed System Documentation.

                           • Issues encountered during installation should be evaluated for inclusion into the contingency
                               plan based on the potential for reoccurrence.
    Synchronization:
                           • ISSO should review installed system to ensure that controls are in place and properly
                               configured and provide the verified list to system owner and AO.
 Interdependencies:        Changes should be updated to the core security documents.
                                                      Implementer’s Tips
•    Clean out test and development environment to ensure that all test data is removed.
•    Extreme care should be exercised when integrating information systems into operational environments or systems so that
      critical operations are not disrupted.

3.3.3.3 Assess System Security
                            Systems being developed or undergoing software, hardware, and/or communication
                            modification(s) must be formally assessed prior to being granted formal accreditation. The
                            objective of the security assessment process is to validate that the system complies with the
                            functional and security requirements and will operate within an acceptable level of residual security
                            risk. Testing of security controls is based on the assessment procedures detailed in NIST SP 800-
                            53A, Guide for Assessing the Security Controls in Federal Information Systems.
      Description:          Prior to initial operations, a security certification must be conducted to assess the extent to which
                            the controls are implemented, operating as intended, and producing the desired outcome with
                            respect to meeting the security requirements for the system. In addition, periodic testing and
                            evaluation of the security controls in an information system must be conducted to ensure
                            continued effectiveness. In addition to verifying security control effectiveness, security certification
                            may uncover and describe actual vulnerabilities in the information system. The determination of
                            security control effectiveness and information system vulnerabilities provides essential information
                            to authorizing officials to facilitate credible, risk-based security accreditation decisions.

                           •    Security Accreditation Package, which includes the Security Assessment Report, the POA&M,
    Expected Outputs:            and the updated System Security Plan.

                            •    Certifier provides written Certification Package results to system owner, ISSO, and system
                                 administrator.
    Synchronization:
                            •    Assessment results are shared with system owner, ISSO, system administrator, and
                                 developers.
 Interdependencies:         All previous steps.
                                                      Implementer’s Tips
• All documents should be in final state for review to ensure a current picture of the system at review time.
• Copying Certification Package to CD/DVD or other electronic media also helps to ensure configuration control and a
   current archive.
• Assigning a core team of representatives from the major stakeholders to meet throughout testing will assist in
   communication and reduce surprises.
• Clearly articulating the C&A process to all parties and agreeing on the level of rigor and scope of testing are very important



                                                                 30
      in ensuring a smooth certification effort.
•    Prioritize continuous monitoring by risk and cost-effectiveness.
•    Reuse as many prior and relevant assessment results as possible.

3.3.3.4 Authorize the Information System
                            OMB Circular A-130 requires the security authorization of an information system to process, store,
                            or transmit information. This authorization (also known as security accreditation), granted by a
                            senior agency official, is based on the verified effectiveness of security controls to some agreed-
                            upon level of assurance and an identified residual risk to agency assets or operations (including
                            mission, function, image, or reputation). The security authorization decision is a risk-based
      Description:          decision that depends heavily, but not exclusively, on the security testing and evaluation results
                            produced during the security control verification process. An authorizing official relies primarily on:
                            (i) the completed system security plan; (ii) the security test and evaluation results; and (iii) the
                            POA&M for reducing or eliminating information system vulnerabilities, in making the security
                            authorization decision to permit operation of the information system and to accept explicitly the
                            residual risk to agency assets or operations.
                            • Security Authorization Decision, documented and transmitted from Authorizing Official to
    Expected Outputs:          System Owner and ISSO
                            • Final Security Authorization Package

                            •   System inventories and reporting statistics should be updated to reflect the accredited status.
    Synchronization:
                            •   CPIC activities should also reflect if the system is accredited.

                            •   Update security and budget documentation with resulting status.
 Interdependencies:
                            •   Certification statement for the information system.
                                                     Implementer’s Tips
Authorizing officials need to make risk decisions not only for the information system, but for the risk extended to the
organization as a whole by placing the system into operation.




                                                                31
3.4 SDLC Phase: Operations and Maintenance




    FIGURE 3-5. RELATING SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN THE OPERATIONS/MAINTENANCE PHASE


3.4.1 Description
Operations and Maintenance is the fourth phase of the SDLC. In this phase, systems are in place
and operating, enhancements and/or modifications to the system are developed and tested, and
hardware and/or software is added or replaced. The system is monitored for continued
performance in accordance with security requirements and needed system modifications are
incorporated. The operational system is periodically assessed to determine how the system can
be made more effective, secure, and efficient. Operations continue as long as the system can be
effectively adapted to respond to an organization’s needs while maintaining an agreed-upon risk
level. When necessary modifications or changes are identified, the system may reenter a previous
phase of the SDLC.

Key security activities for this phase include:

 • Conduct an operational readiness review;

 • Manage the configuration of the system ;

 • Institute processes and procedures for assured operations and continuous monitoring of the
     information system’s security controls; and
 • Perform reauthorization as required.




                                                  32
3.4.2 Control Gates
General types of control gates for this phase may include:

    • Operational Readiness Review

    • Change Control Board Review of Proposed Changes

    • Review of POA&Ms

    • Accreditation Decisions (Every three years or after a major system change).


3.4.3 Major Security Activities

3.4.3.1 Review Operational Readiness
                          Many times when a system transitions to a production environment, unplanned modifications to
                          the system occur. If changes are significant, a modified test of security controls, such as
      Description:        configurations, may be needed to ensure the integrity of the security controls.
                          This step is not always needed; however, it should be considered to help mitigate risk and
                          efficiently address last-minute surprises.

    Expected Outputs:     Evaluation of security implications due to any system changes.

                          • System Administrator and ISSO confirmation to System Owner that system is operating
                             normally and compliant with security requirements.
    Synchronization:
                          • Should a last minute change occur that fundamentally changes the level of risk to the system,
                             the system owner should consider recertification - this is rare.
                          • An operational readiness review supplements the C&A process to ensure that changes are
 Interdependencies:          reviewed for risk potential.
                          • Any change to security controls should be updated in the security documentation.
                                                  Implementer’s Tips
• When an application is enhanced or changed, regression testing helps to ensure that additional vulnerabilities have not
   been introduced. For example, adding source code can often introduce errors in other areas and may negatively impact
   existing and stable functions.
• Changes that include additional data fields should be noted and analyzed to determine if the security posture of the
   system has degraded or introduced a need for additional controls.
• Ensure users are adequately trained on security awareness and practices for the new IT system prior to deploying the
   system in a production environment.

3.4.3.2 Perform Configuration Management and Control
                          An effective agency configuration management and control policy and associated procedures are
                          essential to ensure adequate consideration of the potential security impacts due to specific
                          changes to an information system or its surrounding environment.
                          Configuration management and control procedures are critical to establishing an initial baseline of
                          hardware, software, and firmware components for the information system and subsequently for
      Description:        controlling and maintaining an accurate inventory of any changes to the system. Changes to the
                          hardware, software, or firmware of a system can have a significant security impact.
                          Documenting information system changes and assessing the potential impact on the security of
                          the system on an ongoing basis is an essential aspect of maintaining the security accreditation.
                          These steps, when implemented effectively, provide vital input into the system’s continuous


                                                            33
                          monitoring capability. As such, it facilitates the agency’s ability to identify significant changes that
                          alter a system’s security posture and control effectiveness to ensure proper assessment and
                          testing occurs.
                          Note: The Security Content Automation Protocol (SCAP) is a method for using specific standards
                          to enable automated vulnerability management, measurement, and policy compliance evaluation
                          (e.g., FISMA compliance). Agency Configuration Management procedures should integrate this
                          activity to ensure repeatability and consistency. This is an iterative process that requires periodic
                          review of profile changes.
                          •   Change Control Board (CCB) decisions
    Expected Outputs:     •   Updated security documentation (System Security Plan, POA&M)
                          •   Security evaluations of documented system changes
                          • System updates should be included into the system security documentation at least annually or
                             with significant change.
    Synchronization:
                          • CM system documents should provide input into the Continuous Monitoring plan for the
                             system.
                          • Security architecture should provide key details on component-level security service, which in
                             turn provides a benchmark to evaluate the impact of the planned change. For example, if you
                             are upgrading database software to a new version that has less auditing capability, the
 Interdependencies:          security architecture or security control documentation should provide insight into whether
                             that component needs that level of auditing capability. Resulting analysis would identify
                             whether further review is needed before implementing.
                                                    Implementer’s Tips
• Security significance is not always easy to identify when looking at CM artifacts. The reviewer should keep in mind any
   changes that would directly or indirectly impact confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
• Some system enhancements that add new data may require a review of impact to the system security categorization and
   associated security controls.
• Abbreviated CM processes that allow for unique emergency situations should be identified for emergency purposes.
   These situations should always be followed up with a full review when time permits.

3.4.3.3 Conduct Continuous Monitoring
                          The ultimate objective of continuous monitoring is to determine if the security controls in the
                          information system continue to be effective over time in light of the inevitable changes that occur in
                          the system as well as the environment in which the system operates.
                          A well-designed and well-managed continuous monitoring process can effectively transform an
                          otherwise static security control assessment and risk determination process into a dynamic
                          process that provides essential, near real-time security status information to appropriate
                          organizational officials. This information can be used to take appropriate risk mitigation actions and
                          make credible, risk-based authorization decisions regarding the continued operation of the
      Description:        information system and the explicit acceptance of risk that results from that decision.
                          The ongoing monitoring of security control effectiveness can be accomplished in a variety of ways,
                          including security reviews, self-assessments, configuration management, antivirus management,
                          patch management, security testing and evaluation, or audits. Automation should be leveraged
                          where possible to reduce level of effort and ensure repeatability.
                          Included as a part of continuous monitoring is reaccreditation which occurs when there are
                          significant changes to the information system affecting the security of the system or when a
                          specified time period has elapsed in accordance with federal or agency policy.
                          • Documented results of continuous monitoring
                          • POA&M review
    Expected Outputs:
                          • Security reviews, metrics, measures, and trend analysis
                          • Updated security documentation and security reaccreditation decision, as necessary




                                                              34
                             Continuous monitoring should be adjusted as risk levels fluctuate significantly and security controls
    Synchronization:         are modified, added, and discontinued.

                             Continuous monitoring provides system owners with an effective tool for producing ongoing
Interdependencies:           updates to information system security plans, security assessment reports, and plans of action and
                             milestones documents.
                                                       Implementer’s Tips
•    Agencies should strive to implement a cost-effective continuous monitoring program. Where available, a continuous
      monitoring program should make use of common services for more frequent monitoring, as well as system-specific
      monitoring for critical security controls.
•    Realizing that it is neither feasible nor cost-effective to monitor all of the security controls in any information system on a
      continuous basis, agencies should consider establishing a schedule for security control monitoring to ensure that all
      controls requiring more frequent monitoring are adequately covered and that all controls are covered at least once
      between each accreditation decision.
•    Continuous monitoring processes should be evaluated periodically to review changes in threats and how this could affect
      the ability of controls to protect a system. These threat updates may result in updated risk decisions and changes to
      existing controls.
•    Take credit for activities already underway that count for continuous monitoring. AV DAT file updates, routine
      maintenance, physical security fire drills, log reviews, etc., should all be identified and captured in the continuous
      monitoring phase.
•    Prioritize continuous monitoring by importance of control to mitigating risk, validation of POA&M items that become closed,
      and single control points of failure.
•    Look at a monitoring cycle that will coincide with the system certification life span and capture test procedures and results
      for reuse upon recertification.
•    Continuous monitoring activities can provide useful data to support security performance plans and measures of security
      return on investment (ROI).
•    Defining agency-specific criteria for triggering a reaccreditation helps to ensure decision makers are informed and all
      stakeholders have a common understanding. Some latitude should be given in criteria to allow for unique situations.




                                                                 35
3.5 SDLC Phase: Disposal




             FIGURE 3-6. RELATING SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS IN THE DISPOSAL PHASE


3.5.1 Description
Disposal, the final phase in the SDLC, provides for disposal of a system and closeout of any
contracts in place. Information security issues associated with information and system disposal
should be addressed explicitly. When information systems are transferred, become obsolete, or
are no longer usable, it is important to ensure that government resources and assets are protected.

Usually, there is no definitive end to a system. Systems normally evolve or transition to the next
generation because of changing requirements or improvements in technology. System security
plans should continually evolve with the system. Much of the environmental, management, and
operational information should still be relevant and useful in developing the security plan for the
follow-on system.

The disposal activities ensure the orderly termination of the system and preserve the vital
information about the system so that some or all of the information may be reactivated in the
future, if necessary. Particular emphasis is given to proper preservation of the data processed by
the system so that the data is effectively migrated to another system or archived in accordance
with applicable records management regulations and policies for potential future access.

Key security activities for this phase include:




                                                  36
    • Build and Execute a Disposal/Transition Plan;

    • Archive of critical information;

    • Sanitization of media; and

    • Disposal of hardware and software.


3.5.2 Control Gates
General types of control gates for this phase may include:

    • System Closure Review

    • Change Control Board

    • Security Review of Closure.


3.5.3 Major Security Activities

3.5.3.1 Build and Execute a Disposal/Transition Plan
                          Building a disposal / transition plan ensures that all stakeholders are aware of the future plan for the
                          system and its information. This plan should account for the disposal / transition status for all critical
                          components, services, and information.
                          Much like a work plan, this plan identifies necessary steps, decisions, and milestones needed to
                          properly close down, transition, or migrate a system or its information.
      Description:
                          In many cases, disposed systems or system components have remained dormant but still
                          connected to the infrastructure. As a result, these components are often overlooked, unaccounted
                          for, or maintained at suboptimal security protection levels thus, providing additional and
                          unnecessary risk to the infrastructure and all connected systems. A transition plan assists in
                          mitigating these possible outcomes.

 Expected Outputs:        Documented disposal/transition plan for closing or transitioning the system and/or its information.


                          Security documentation should reflect pending plans if security decisions and funding are
    Synchronization:      reallocated or otherwise impacted because of the disposal decision.

                          Security documentation such as the security plan and security control requirements may need
 Interdependencies:       updating.
                                                     Implementer’s Tips
• Consult with agency Records Management, Privacy, and Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) officials prior to disposal to
   ensure compliance with these laws and applicable agency policy.
• Do not wait for the disposal phase to make a disposal/transition plan. Plan for disposal/transition throughout all phases of
   the life cycle. This is best done as part of the requirements phase so full resource requirements for disposal/transition are
   understood and planned for. Throughout the life cycle, this can be done as hardware and software become obsolete or
   damaged; in other phases, it will require tasks outlined in this phase.




                                                               37
3.5.3.2 Ensure Information Preservation
                            When preserving information, organizations should consider the methods that will be required for
                            retrieving information in the future. The technology used to retrieve the records may not be readily
      Description:          available in the future (particularly if encrypted). Legal requirements for records retention must be
                            considered when disposing of systems.

 Expected Outputs:          Index of preserved information, and its location and retention attributes.


    Synchronization:        Records management, Privacy Act, and FOIA requirements should be considered.


 Interdependencies:         Privacy considerations or activities may be important for FOIA reasons.
                                                       Implementer’s Tips
•    Close coordination with the organization Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Office will assist in planning for this activity.
•    Organizations can also get practical tips from the National Archives and Records Administration Information System
      Security Oversight Office.

3.5.3.3 Sanitize Media
                            Based on the results of security categorization, the system owner should refer to NIST Special
                            Publication (SP) 800-53, Recommended Security Controls for Federal Information Systems, which
                            specifies that, “the organization sanitizes information system digital media using approved
                            equipment, techniques, and procedures. The organization tracks, documents, and verifies media
                            sanitization and destruction actions and periodically tests sanitization equipment/procedures to
                            ensure correct performance. The organization sanitizes or destroys information system digital
                            media before its disposal or release for reuse outside the organization, to prevent unauthorized
                            individuals from gaining access to and using the information contained on the media.”
                            NIST SP 800-88, Guidelines for Media Sanitization, divides media sanitization into four categories:
      Description:          disposal, clearing, purging and destroying. It further suggests that the system owner categorize the
                            information, assess the nature of the medium on which it is recorded, assess the risk to
                            confidentiality, and determine the future plans for the media. Then, decide on the appropriate
                            sanitization process. The selected process should be assessed as to cost, environmental impact,
                            etc., and a decision made that best mitigates the risk to confidentiality and best satisfies other
                            constraints imposed on the process.
                            Several factors should be considered along with the security categorization of the system
                            confidentiality when making sanitization decisions. The cost versus benefit of a media sanitization
                            process should be understood prior to a final decision. For instance, it may not be cost-effective to
                            degauss inexpensive media such as diskettes.

 Expected Outputs:          Media sanitization records


    Synchronization:        None.

 Interdependencies: Security categorization provides the identification and associated risk level of system information.
                                                       Implementer’s Tips
• Even though clear or purge may be the recommended solution, it may be more cost-effective (considering training,
   tracking, and validation, etc.) to destroy media rather than use one of the other options.
• Organizations can always increase the level of sanitization applied if that is reasonable and indicated by an assessment of
   the existing risk so that proper sanitization techniques are applied.




                                                                 38
3.5.3.4 Dispose of Hardware and Software
                           Hardware and software can be sold, given away, or discarded as provided by applicable law or
                           regulation. The disposal of software should comply with license or other agreements with the
                           developer and with government regulations. There is rarely a need to destroy hardware except for
                           some storage media that contains sensitive information and that cannot be sanitized without
                           destruction. In situations when the storage media cannot be sanitized appropriately, removal and
      Description:         physical destruction of the media may be possible so that the remaining hardware may be sold or
                           given away. Some systems may contain sensitive information after the storage media is removed. If
                           there is doubt whether sensitive information remains on a system, the ISSO should be consulted
                           before disposing of the system. Also, the vendor may be consulted for additional disposal options or
                           verification of risk.
                           •   Disposition records for hardware and software. These records may include lists of hardware
 Expected Outputs:              and software released (sold, discarded, or donated), and lists of hardware and software
                                redeployed to other projects or tasks within the organization.


    Synchronization:       Updating of system and component inventories.


Interdependencies:         System hardware and software inventory should be updated accordingly.
                                                     Implementer’s Tips
• Do not forget property accountability requirements when disposing of a system. When possible, consider donation of used
   IT and/or e-cycling of hazmat parts.
• Title 40 USC advises system owners and custodians that excess equipment is “Educationally useful” and “Federal
   equipment is a vital national resource.” Wherever possible, excess equipment and media should be made available to
   qualifying schools and nonprofit organizations to the extent permitted by law.
• For cost savings, some agencies maintain reasonably old parts for contingency operations. For example, utilizing retired
   laptops for a telecommuting scenario that requires only partial processing for vital Internet or email communications.

3.5.3.5 Closure of System

      Description:         The information system is formally shut down and disassembled at this point.


                           •   Documentation verifying system closure, including final closure notification to the authorizing
 Expected Outputs:              and certifying officials, configuration management, system owner, ISSO, and program manger.


    Synchronization:       None.

                           • Archival of security documentation as appropriate.
                           • If continuous monitoring services are provided, notification to providers of closure is needed
Interdependencies:             (may include CM, AV, IR, and CCB).
                           • Inventory updates for FISMA reporting and enterprise architecture.
                                                     Implementer’s Tips
•    A memorandum articulating formal system closure and proper action taken that includes in the distribution all key
      stakeholders provides the simplest approach to formal closure.




                                                               39
CHAPTER FOUR

ADDITIONAL SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS


“B
              uilding security in” is a security management technique that implements specific
              security considerations during SDLC phases. However, IT projects and initiatives
              are not always as clearly scoped as system or application developments. Some
initiatives are service-based and cross IT platforms (and, in some cases, organizations) or are
facility-oriented, like the building of a data center or hot site. These projects must follow, as
much as possible, established review boards and recognize and address necessary security
considerations. This section highlights common examples and provides some security-oriented
considerations. The core elements of integrating security into the SDLC remain the same for
these areas. Communications and documentation of the stakeholder relationship in regards to
securing the solution will be the key success factor.


4.1 Supply Chain and Software Assurance
Ensuring supply chain 4 and software assurance will require a public-private effort to promulgate
best practices and methodologies that promote integrity, security, and reliability in hardware and
software code development, including processes and procedures that diminish the possibilities of
erroneous code, malicious code, or trap doors that could be introduced during development. This
area is maturing, and future guidelines will likely provide more specifics. In general, these
processes and procedures should target the three following goals:

      •   Trustworthiness - No exploitable vulnerabilities exist, either maliciously or
          unintentionally inserted, and materials are what they claim to be without counterfeit,
          piracy, or violation of intellectual rights.

      •   Predictable Execution - Justifiable confidence that hardware and software, when
          executed, functions as intended.

      •   Conformance - Planned and systematic set of multidisciplinary activities that ensure
          hardware and software processes and products conform to requirements, standards, and
          procedures.

Towards these goals, acquisition managers and information security managers should factor in
risks posed by the supply chain as part of their risk mitigation efforts including:

      •   Information on suppliers’ process capabilities (business practices) should be used to
          determine security risks posed by the suppliers’ products and services to the acquisition
          project and to the operations enabled by the system.




4
    Supply chain refers to the distribution channel of a product from its sourcing to its delivery to
    the end consumer.


                                                  40
   •    Information about evaluated products should be made available and reviewed, along with
        responsive provisions for discovering exploitable vulnerabilities, and products would be
        securely configured in use.


4.2 Service-Oriented Architecture

Service-oriented architecture (SOA) is an information system architectural style where existing
or new functionalities are packaged as services. These services communicate with each other by
passing data from one service to another, or by coordinating an activity between one or more
services. NIST SP 800-95, Guide to Secure Web Services, provides more information on SOA
security considerations.
Primary security management challenges with SOA include scoping the security boundary,
assigning an appropriate risk level, and managing security expectations and responsibilities
across multiple stakeholders and agreements. Designing a strategy for accreditation can also pose
a challenge in terms of schedule and resources. While the traditional SDLC process will likely
not fit, the security considerations remain, for the most part, applicable. Agencies should plan
their approach so that accreditation as well as continuous monitoring and reaccreditation is cost-
effective and manageable.
As many traditional analytic tools (scanners, intrusion detection systems [IDSs], packet
crafting/analysis tools, etc.) are not able to effectively evaluate the aggregate security posture of
a service-oriented architecture, it is left to the security analyst to utilize analytic tools, apply
unique SOA test cases, and extrapolate a synthetic model of the security environment for
vulnerability and risk analysis.
In addition to automated testing that may be available, the following reviews that focus on the
unique aspects of SOA are suggested:
  • Audit Trail Certification & Correlation;

 • Service-Oriented Architecture Interaction Description (Portlets, Security Assertions Markup
       Language (SAML), Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP), Universal Description,
       Discovery, and Integration (UDDI), Web Services Description Language (WSDL),
       Extensible Access Control Markup Language (XACML), as well as many of the WS-*
       standards emerging in the web services arena including WS-Security, WS-Policy, and WS-
       Interoperability; highlighting security features and benefits in each);
 • Access Control (such as discretionary and role-based);

 • Core enterprise services composition and utilization; and

 • Creation, protection, and disposal of robust meta-data.


4.3 Specific Accreditation of Security Modules for Reuse
As applications and information systems become more object-oriented and component-based, it
becomes necessary to consider the security implications as well as cost of reusing software
modules across multiple projects and perhaps across multiple organizations. It is recommended
that components and software modules be created with reuse in mind, particularly for code that
must be relied upon to provide security functionality across a broad range of projects. The


                                                  41
certification & accreditation of these modules, much like unit testing for functional evaluation,
provides developers, architects, and engineers with a ready toolbox of trusted code that can be
implemented as needed, at a reduced cost, to ensure security compliance and risk management
during the development of an information system at a reduced cost.

Accredited modules should be well documented as to their features and functions; accreditation
documentation should be stored along with the module; and documentation for developers
highlighting use cases and implementation practices that will not be likely to void the
accreditation should also be made available. The module and documentation should be digitally
signed by the developer (or development team) to preserve the integrity and authenticity of the
accreditation. Sufficiently complex modules (likely to be considered applications in their own
right) may warrant essentially the same process as described in NIST SP 800-37.


4.4 Cross-Organizational Solutions
Cross-organizational solutions seek to provide access to information applications pursuant to a
memorandum of agreement or service-level agreement, which provides value and benefit to both
(or multiple) organizations. The applications made available across organizations can be
categorized into two cases based on intended consumers. In the first case, the intended group of
consumers is the “Enterprise,” which refers to the organization considered in total and includes
interdependent resources (i.e., people, organizations, and technology) that must coordinate
functions and share information in support of a common mission (or a set of related missions).
In the second case, the expected group of consumers is a Community of Interest (COI). A COI is
a collection of people who exchange information using a common vocabulary in support of
shared missions, business processes, and objectives. The community is made up of the
users/operators that participate in information exchange, the developers of services, applications,
capabilities, and systems for these users, and the functional proponents that define requirements
and obtain resources for acquisition on behalf of the users.

When developing cross-organizational solutions, care must be taken to draft guiding documents
(a memorandum of agreement or service-level agreement) that categorically describe the security
features, requirements, and expected performance levels to ensure that all parties are adequately
protected. Further, it is necessary to agree upon test and validation responsibilities, incident
response procedures, and monitoring and operations policies that will provide sufficient
management of risk going forward. Special emphasis will need to be placed upon user and
code/application authentication and authorization, which includes planning for growth of the user
base, the interdependency of authentication and authorization systems between organizations,
common access environments, and enrollment/disenrollment procedures.


4.5 Technology Advancement and Major Migrations
With the fast pace of innovation and correspondingly selective obsolescence in the information
technology arena, consideration must be given not only to integrating security into the SDLC for
new systems and the integration of systems, but also to the overhaul, upgrade, or migration of
systems to address technology advancement. Advances in technology create new challenges in
enterprise security as well as risks of reintroducing well-known vulnerabilities through flawed
implementation/integration practices. Synergy of technology creates a synergy of exposure
compounding existing problems.


                                                42
When grappling with the security implications of technology advancement or planning a major
system migration, organizations are likely to experience the following organizational behaviors
regarding information system security:

 • As the technology is first introduced to address the organization’s mission (or change in
     mission) or to solve an acute business problem, the organization will often seek to relax or
     remove baseline security requirements in order to speed the process along.
 • During the eventual C&A of a legacy information system, the adequacy of existing
     information system security controls will be evaluated. Security is typically enforced
     through controls on the legacy infrastructure, which have been certified and accredited, the
     justification being that they provide adequate mitigation.
 • Eventually the information system matures, adoption increases, or understanding of the
     vulnerabilities, risks, and mitigation strategies of the technology or its environment
     improves to the point that the management team is at least as comfortable with the risk
     management plan for the new technology as with the legacy system, and perhaps more
     confident given the demonstrated advanced capabilities of the system.
However, technology advancement, coupled with these anticipated organizational behaviors,
provides opportunities for an organization to capitalize on the need for the advanced technology
by planning for a secure migration from legacy technologies in a secure manner.

Further, this pattern of behavior is not limited to technology that is truly advanced or new. It is
not uncommon for technology developed ten or more years ago to be thrust into the limelight.
This technology, however, may have lacked the scrutiny over time to be assured that the
discovery of vulnerabilities and active patching of vulnerabilities discovered in
similar/equivalent technologies has been conducted.


4.6 Data Center or IT Facility Development
Data center or IT facility developmental security places a special emphasis on physical security
solutions, and rightly so. Nonetheless, it is important to remember that data centers are the
storehouse for vast quantities of computing power and storage upon which applications are built,
and special attention is required to ensure that all customers utilizing the data center’s facilities
are adequately protected.

A typical large organization may have multiple data centers each charged with supporting a
specific set of customers and missions, but interrelated in order to supply high availability, and
meet continuity of operations and disaster recovery requirements (often requiring the ability to
store data off-site or provide for alternate sites for data processing) in a cost-effective manner.
The data centers must share the burden and provide a matrix of redundancy. Under these
conditions, it is crucial that data separation be maintained for data at rest as well as in transit and
that, in particular, separation of duties and auditability of administrative functions for data center
staff be strictly enforced. In many cases, this will justify the need for separate local area
networks (LANs) or Virtual LANs (VLANs) for administrative traffic and applications.




                                                  43
This integration of security, both technical and operational, becomes even more important with
the rise of virtualization in the data center and the ability to move entire virtualized operating
system environments across independent and distinct hardware platforms within the data center.

One unique consideration of the data center is the security of the contextual environmental data.
This data will result from the monitoring of the physical security systems (cameras, motion
sensors, etc.) as well as the environmental systems necessary to keep the computing hardware in
a temperate working environment. This data is increasingly stored on a digital medium that is
network-accessible and should be handled with care as it is sensitive in nature and may give an
attacker access to core information systems. These systems should be adequately protected, and
the resulting data should be stored off-site or out of band (i.e., not on the same
networks/information systems as the customer information systems housed within the data
center).


4.7 Virtualization
Virtualization, the use of virtual machines and applications, is a growing trend that provides
opportunity for cost savings. While it can provide additional security in terms of isolation and
recovery, it requires additional security planning for unique security risks inherit in virtualization
implementations such as data interception through the shared clipboard, keystroke logging within
the virtual machine, and denial of service to the host’s resources.

Security controls associated with traditional physical platforms commonly overlooked in
implementing virtualization include:

    •   Anti-malware within the virtual machine and host;

    •   Segregation of administrative duties for host and versions;

    •   Audit logging as well as exporting and storing the logs outside the virtual environment;

    •   Configuration and patch management of the virtual machine and host;

    •   Encrypting network traffic between the virtual machine and host; and

    •   Intrusion Detection System (IDS) and Intrusion Prevention System (IPS) monitoring.

Due to its distributed network and complexity, mobilizing virtualization can further exacerbate
common security concerns such as malware, data leaks, patch management, and weak access
controls.
For best results, agencies should plan security into their selection criteria and, at a minimum,
create and document a secure deployment and maintenance plan prior to implementing a virtual
solution.




                                                 44
APPENDIX A - GLOSSARY
              Term                                                  Definition
Acceptance                          The act of an authorized representative of the government by which
                                    the government, for itself or as agent of another, assumes control or
                                    ownership of existing identified supplies tendered or approves
                                    specific services rendered as partial or complete performance of the
                                    contract. It is the final determination whether or not a facility or
                                    system meets the specified technical and performance standards.

Acquisition                         Includes all stages of the process of acquiring property or services,
                                    beginning with the process for determining the need for the
                                    property or services and ending with contract completion and
                                    closeout.

Business Impact Analysis (BIA)      An analysis of an information technology (IT) system’s
                                    requirements, processes, and interdependencies used to
                                    characterize system contingency requirements and priorities in the
                                    event of a significant disruption.
                                    SOURCE: SP 800-34

Certification and Accreditation –   A comprehensive assessment of the management, operational, and
(C&A)                               technical security controls in an information system, made in
                                    support of security accreditation, to determine the extent to which
                                    the controls are implemented correctly, operating as intended, and
                                    producing the desired outcome with respect to meeting the security
                                    requirements for the system. Accreditation is the official
                                    management decision given by a senior agency official to authorize
                                    operation of an information system and to explicitly accept the risk
                                    to agency operations (including mission, functions, image, or
                                    reputation), agency assets, or individuals, based on the
                                    implementation of an agreed-upon set of security controls.
                                    SOURCE: SP 800-37

Clinger-Cohen Act of 1996           Also known as Information Technology Management Reform Act.
                                    A statute that substantially revised the way that IT resources are
                                    managed and procured, including a requirement that each agency
                                    design and implement a process for maximizing the value and
                                    assessing and managing the risks of IT investments.

Closeout                            Includes all final contract activities (e.g., ensuring completion of all
                                    requirements, making final payment).

Commercial off-the-shelf            Software and hardware that already exists and is available from
(COTS)                              commercial sources. It is also referred to as off-the-shelf.

Contract administration             Government management of a contract to ensure that the
                                    government receives the quality of products and services specified
                                    in the contract within established costs and schedules.




                                                  A-1
             Term                                              Definition
Contracting Officer (CO)          A person with the authority to enter into, administer, and/or
                                  terminate contracts and make related determinations and findings.

Contracting Officer’s Technical   An individual to whom the CO delegates certain contract
Representative                    administration responsibilities, usually related to technical direction
                                  and acceptance issues.

Control Gate                      A point in time when the system development effort will be
                                  evaluated and when management will determine whether the
                                  project should continue as is, change direction, or be discontinued.

Deliverable                       A product or service that is prepared for and delivered to the
                                  government under the terms of a contract.

Environment                       Aggregate of external procedures, conditions, and objects affecting
                                  the development, operation, and maintenance of an information
                                  system.
                                  SOURCE: FIPS 200; CNSSI-4009

Federal Acquisition Regulation    The regulation that codifies uniform acquisition policies and
(FAR)                             procedures for executive agencies.

Federal Information Processing    A standard for adoption and use by federal agencies that has been
Standards                         developed within the Information Technology Laboratory and
                                  published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, a
                                  part of the U.S. Department of Commerce. A FIPS covers some
                                  topic in information technology in order to achieve a common level
                                  of quality or some level of interoperability.

Federal Information Processing    FIPS publications are issued by NIST after approval by the
Standards Publications            Secretary of Commerce. Some FIPS Pubs are mandatory for use in
                                  federal acquisitions.

Federal Information Security      Requires agencies to integrate IT security into their capital
Management Act (FISMA)            planning and enterprise architecture processes at the agency,
                                  conduct annual IT security reviews of all programs and systems,
                                  and report the results of those reviews to the Office of Management
                                  and Budget (OMB).
                                  SOURCE: SP 800-65

Information Resources             Information and related resources, such as personnel, equipment,
                                  funds, and information technology.
                                  SOURCE: 44 U.S.C., Sec. 3502

Information Security              The protection of information and information systems from
                                  unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or
                                  destruction in order to provide confidentiality, integrity, and
                                  availability.
                                  SOURCE: 44 U.S.C., Sec. 3542




                                                A-2
             Term                                             Definition
Information System              A discrete set of information resources organized for the collection,
                                processing, maintenance, use, sharing, dissemination, or disposal of
                                information.
                                SOURCE: 44 U.S.C., Sec. 3502; OMB Circular A-130, App. III

Information System Owner        Official responsible for the overall procurement, development,
                                integration, modification, or operation and maintenance of an
                                information system.
                                SOURCE: FIPS 200; CNSSI-4009 Adapted

Information System Security     Individual assigned responsibility by the senior agency information
Officer (ISSO)                  security officer, authorizing official, management official, or
                                information system owner for ensuring that the appropriate
                                operational security posture is maintained for an information
                                system or program.
                                SOURCE: SP 800-53; CNSSI-4009 Adapted

Information Technology (IT)     Any equipment or interconnected system that is used in the
                                automatic acquisition, storage, manipulation, management,
                                movement, control, display, switching, interchange, transmission,
                                or reception of data or information. It commonly includes
                                computers, ancillary equipment, software, firmware, similar
                                procedures, services, and related resources.

Plan of Action and Milestones   A document that identifies tasks needing to be accomplished. It
(POA&M)                         details resources required to accomplish the elements of the plan,
                                any milestones in meeting the tasks, and scheduled completion
                                dates for the milestones. The purpose of this POA&M is to assist
                                agencies in identifying, assessing, prioritizing, and monitoring the
                                progress of corrective efforts for security weaknesses found in
                                programs and systems.
                                SOURCE: OMB Memorandum 02-01

Privacy Impact Assessment       An analysis of how information is handled: 1) to ensure handling
(PIA)                           conforms to applicable legal, regulatory, and policy requirements
                                regarding privacy; 2) to determine the risks and effects of
                                collecting, maintaining, and disseminating information in
                                identifiable form in an electronic information system; and 3) to
                                examine and evaluate protections and alternative processes for
                                handling information to mitigate potential privacy risks.
                                SOURCE: OMB Memorandum 03-22

Residual Risk                   The remaining potential risk after all IT security measures are
                                applied. There is a residual risk associated with each threat.
                                SOURCE: SP 800-33




                                              A-3
APPENDIX B - ACRONYMS
AO       Authorizing Official
AV       Anti-Virus
BIA      Business Impact Assessment
C&A      Certification and Accreditation
CCB      Change Control Board
CIO      Chief Information Officer
CISO     Chief Information Security Officer
CM       Configuration Management
COI      Community of Interest
CONOPS   Concept of Operations
COOP     Continuity of Operations
COTR     Contracting Officer's Technical Representative
COTS     Commercial Off-The-Shelf
CP       Contingency Plan
CPIC     Capital Planning and Investment Control
DR       Disaster Recovery
EA       Enterprise Architecture
FAR      Federal Acquisition Register
FIPS     Federal Information Processing Standard
FISMA    Federal Information Security Management Act
FOIA     Freedom of Information Act
GAO      Government Accountability Office
IDS      Intrusion Detection System
IPS      Intrusion Prevention System
IR       Incident Response
ISSO     Information System Security Officer
IT       Information Technology
ITL      Information Technology Laboratory
JAD      Joint Application Development
LAN      Local Area Network
NIST     National Institute of Standards and Technology
OMB      Office of Management and Budget
PIA      Privacy Impact Assessment
PII      Personally Identifiable Information
POA&M    Plan of Action and Milestones
QA       Quality Assurance
RAD      Rapid Application Development
RFP      Request for Proposal
SAISO    Senior Agency Information Security Officer
SAML     Security Assertion Markup Language
SATE     Security Awareness, Training, and Education
SCAP     Security Content Automation Protocol
SDLC     System Development Life Cycle
SLA      Service-Level Agreement
SOA      Service-Oriented Architecture
SOAP     Simple Object Access Protocol
SOW      Statement of Work
SP       Special Publication



                                              B-1
SSP     System Security Plan
ST&E    Security Test and Evaluation
UDDI    Universal Description, Discovery, and Integration
USC     United States Code
VLAN    Virtual Local Area Network
WSDL    Web Services Description Language
XACML   Extensible Access Control Markup Language




                                              B-2
APPENDIX C - REFERENCES
Clinger-Cohen Act, 40 United States Code (U.S.C.) 1401 and following, 1996.

Computer Security Act of 1987, Public Law (P.L.) 100-235.

National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act of 1995 (P.L. 104-113).

Privacy Act of 1974, 5 U.S.C. 552a.

E-Government Act, P.L. 107-347, December 2002.

Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) of 2002, 44 U.S.C. Chapter 35,
Subchapter III, 2002.

OMB Circular A-130, Management of Federal Information Resources, November 2000.

GSA publication, A Guide to Planning, Acquiring, and Managing Information Technology
Systems, Version 1, December 1998.

Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 140-2, Security Requirements for Cryptographic
Modules, June 2001.

FIPS 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information
Systems, February 2004.

FIPS 200, Minimum Security Requirements for Federal Information and Information Systems,
March 2006.

NIST SP 800-18 Revision 1, Guide for Developing Security Plans for Information Technology
Systems, February 2006.

NIST SP 800-30, 5 Risk Management Guide for Information Technology Systems, January 2002.

NIST SP 800-33, Underlying Technical Models for Information Technology Security, December
2001.

NIST SP 800-37 Revision 1, Draft Guide for Security Authorization of Federal Information
Systems: A Security Lifecycle Approach, August 2008.

NIST SP 800-39, Draft Managing Risk from Information Systems: An Organizational
Perspective, April 2008

NIST SP 800-53, Recommended Security Controls for Federal Information Systems, December
2007.


5
    NIST SP 800-30 is being revised to focus exclusively on risk assessments with application to
    the various steps in the Risk Management Framework described in SP 800-39.


                                               C-1
NIST SP 800-53A, Guide for Assessing the Security Controls in Federal Information Systems,
June 2008.

NIST SP 800-60 Revision 1, Guide for Mapping Types of Information and Information Systems
to Security Categorization Levels, August 2008.

NIST SP 800-65, Integrating Security into the Capital Planning and Investment Control Process,
January 2005.

NIST Interagency Report (NISTIR) 7298, Glossary of Key Information Security Terms, April
2006.




                                             C-2
APPENDIX D - NIST REFERENCE MATRIX AND WEBSITES
To assist in further research, the matrix below provides a mapping of relevant NIST publications
to the corresponding SDLC security activity. Additional information is available at the
following NIST websites: http://csrc.nist.gov and http://nvd.nist.gov/scap.

                         Security Activity                                         Supporting NIST Pub(s)
                                                      Phase 1 – Initiation
 1.   Initiate Security Planning                                       SP 800-64, -100, -37, -53
 2.   Categorize the Information System                                SP 800-60, FIPS 199
 3.   Assess Business Impact                                           SP 800-34
 4.   Assess Privacy Impact                                            SP 800-37
 5.   Ensure Secure Information System Development                     SP 800-64, -16
                                         Phase 2 – Development / Acquisition
 1.   Assess Risk to System                                            SP 800-30
 2.   Select and Document Security Controls                            SP 800-53
 3.   Design Security Architecture                                     SP 800-30
 4.   Engineer in Security and Develop Controls                        SP 800-53, FIPS 200
 5.   Develop Security Documentation                                   SP 800-18
 6.   Conduct Developmental, Functional, and Security Testing          FIPS 140-2; SCAP website (see above)
                                        Phase 3 – Implementation / Assessment
 1.   Create Detailed Plan for C&A                                     SP 800-37
 2.   Integrate Security into Established Environments or Systems      SP 800-64
 3.   Assess System Security                                           SP 800-37, -53A
 4.   Authorize the Information System                                 SP 800-37
                                           Phase 4 – Operation / Maintenance
 1.   Review Operational Readiness                                     SP 800-70, -53A
 2.   Perform Configuration Management                                 SP 800-53A, -100
 3.   Conduct Continuous Monitoring                                    SP 800-53A, -100
                                                      Phase 5 – Disposal
 1.   Build and Execute Disposal or Transition Plan                    None
 2.   Ensure Information Preservation                                  SP 800-12, -14
 3.   Sanitize Media                                                   SP 800-88
 4.   Dispose of Hardware and Software                                 SP 800-35
 5.   Close System                                                     None




                                                              D-1
APPENDIX E - OTHER SDLC METHODOLOGIES
There are many SDLC methodologies, in addition to the waterfall methodology discussed in this
publication, which can be used by an organization to effectively develop an information system.
The expected size and complexity of the system, the development schedule, and the anticipated
length of a system’s life may affect the choice of which SDLC model to use. In many cases, the
choice of SDLC model will be defined by an organization’s acquisition policy. Regardless of the
methodology employed, or the formality or duration of the development process, it is critical that
security requirements and considerations, including key security documentation, are planned for
and adequately addressed throughout the entire life cycle.
Joint Application Development
In a traditional waterfall methodology, the development team gathers requirements, many times
through a series of interviews with the customer, and then proceeds to develop the application.
Using a Joint Application Development (JAD) methodology, however, the client or end user
collaborates with the developers through JAD sessions to design and develop an application.
Because the development process involves greater involvement of the client, this methodology
may lead to faster development and greater client satisfaction.
Prototype Model
The Prototype Model is a development methodology similar to the waterfall model, in that once
the requirements analysis is performed and the prototype is designed, the prototype development
begins. Once created, the prototype is evaluated by the customer, who then provides feedback to
the developer. The developer, in turn, refines the product according to the customer's
expectation. After a number of iterations of this process, the final product is provided to the
customer.
Rapid Application Development
Rapid Application Development (RAD) is a development methodology that creates an
application more quickly by employing techniques aimed at speeding application development,
such as the use of fewer formal methodologies and reuse of software components. In exchange
for faster development, some compromises in functionality and performance may be realized. It
is important to ensure, however, that this exchange for a faster product delivery does not result in
compromises being made in the selection and specification of the security controls necessary to
provide adequate security for the information and the information system, and the mission
function they support.
Spiral Model
The Spiral Model is a development methodology that combines the features of the prototype and
waterfall models, and is often favored for large, expensive, and complicated projects. The spiral
model process generally involves defining requirements and creating an initial design, and
constructing and evaluating the first prototype. This same process is then repeated for
subsequent prototypes until the refined prototype represents the product desired. The final
system is constructed based on the final prototype, and is evaluated and maintained in a
production environment.




                                                E-1
APPENDIX F - ADDITIONAL ACQUISITION PLANNING
CONSIDERATIONS
This publication has been developed to assist agencies in integrating essential information
security steps into an established IT system development life cycle (SDLC). This appendix
discusses additional acquisition planning considerations that contribute to information security
during the Development / Acquisition phase of the SDLC.

•   Type of Contract
    The type of contract (e.g., firm fixed price, time and materials, cost plus fixed fee) can have
    significant security implications. The information security technical representative
    developing the specifications and the contracting officer should work together to select the
    contract type that will be most advantageous to the organization.

•   Review by Other Functional Groups
    Depending on the size and scope of the system, a review of the system by participants from
    various functional groups (e.g., legal, human resources, physical security, records
    management) may be useful. These functional groups should have insight into the
    confidentiality, integrity, and availability requirements. Involving these groups early in the
    planning process is important because it may result in reduced life-cycle costs, and it is easier
    to change requirements in the early stages.

•   Review by Certification Agent and Authorizing Official
    OMB Circular A-130, Appendix III, requires that systems be approved, or authorized, to
    process data in specific environments. Management, operational, and technical controls must
    be employed to adequately protect the information system. Management and operational
    security controls can sometimes be outside the scope of the contract, as the developer, in
    most cases, cannot be responsible for the organization’s implementation of these security
    controls. The technical security control functional and assurance specifications must be
    contained in the contract with the developer. These security controls should be factored into
    the development of the technical specifications. The authorizing official (AO) can take these
    assumptions into account when deciding on the adequacy of the total set of security controls
    for reducing the residual risks to an acceptable level.
    C&A testing also includes management and operational security controls implemented by the
    organization. Determination of the efficacy of these organization-implemented security
    controls is part of the security controls assessment. Assessment processes should confirm
    that the assumptions in the system security plan have been implemented, and that the total set
    of security controls are adequate to reduce the residual risks to an acceptable level.
    Acceptance testing of the security properties of the contractor-developed system is a
    prerequisite to security testing as part of the C&A process.
    Because the AO is responsible for accepting the risk of operating the system, they can advise
    the development team if the risks associated with the eventual operation of the system appear
    to be unacceptable. Specifications can impose excessive burden and costs if the acceptable
    residual risks are not known. The involvement of the AO is required for this determination
    of acceptable residual risks. It is easier to incorporate requirement changes during the



                                                 F-1
    planning stage of a system acquisition than during the solicitation, source selection, or
    contract administration stages.

•   Cyclical Nature of the Process
    The security steps in the Development / Acquisition phase may need to be addressed
    cyclically. These security steps interrelate and build on each other. Depending on the size and
    complexity of the system, these steps may be performed often as ideas are refined.

•   Evaluation and Acceptance
    The system evaluation plan and appropriate acceptance criteria are developed in the
    Development / Acquisition phase. The solicitation should be designed for evaluation, which
    should include testing and analysis. Specifications should be written in a way to make it easy
    to clearly determine if the implemented system complies with the specification. In general,
    two separate activities require security testing – contract acceptance and C&A.
    Contract acceptance usually addresses only the functional and assurance security
    specifications contained in the contract with the developer. C&A testing also includes
    management and operational security controls implemented by the organization. The
    existence and correct operation of controls, which may be assumed by the developer, may
    have been included as assumptions in the system security requirements. An adequate
    determination of the organization’s security controls as implemented is part of C&A testing.
    Acceptance testing of the security properties of the developed system is a prerequisite to
    security testing under the C&A process.

•   Request for Proposal (RFP) Development
    An RFP enables an organization to make a best-value decision based on an offeror’s
    proposal. One strength of the RFP process is the flexibility it provides the government and
    the offeror to negotiate a contract that best meets the government’s needs.
    The organization can identify needed information security features, procedures, and
    assurances in many ways. An RFP can be a flexible document. Guidance on acquisition
    alternatives should be obtained from the organization’s acquisition office or the contracting
    officer.

•   Security Specifications and Statement of Work Development
    Security specifications and the statement of work (SOW) are based on the requirements
    analysis. The specifications provide details of what the system is supposed to do.
    Specifications should also be written independently of the implementation mechanisms,
    strategy, and design. In other words, the specifications should state what the system is to do,
    not how. The developer’s implementation of the system in conformance with the
    specifications can and should be tested. This implies that well-written specifications are those
    that can be tested.
    The SOW details what the developer must do in the performance of the contract.
    Documentation developed under the contract, for example, is specified in the SOW. Security
    assurance requirements, which detail many aspects of the processes the developer follows




                                                F-2
and what evidence must be provided to assure the organization that the processes have been
conducted correctly and completely, may also be specified in the SOW.
There is an exception to the general rule that security functional requirements map into
security specifications. Selection of mechanisms to implement security functions may occur
during the system operation life cycle rather than during proposal preparation. Such decisions
may be deferred to the system operational life cycle to respond to changes in technology or
the security environment. For example, the authentication mechanism may change from
memorized reusable password to token to biometric technique during the life cycle. The
acquiring organization may deal with selection of mechanisms to implement security
functions during the system operation life cycle by tasking the developer in the SOW to
perform a study and to recommend a mechanism or combination of mechanisms. The
selection of the mechanism or combination of mechanisms remains the procuring
organizations function.
Experience has shown that if the specifications and the SOW do not delineate the security
properties of the system completely and unambiguously, then the system may not achieve the
desired level of security.
The following sections describe two sources for information security specifications: general
specifications and federally mandated specifications. The acquisition initiator should focus
on what is required and work with the contracting officer to determine the best way to ask for
it.

   o General Specifications
       Many sources of general information security specifications are available and may
       include NIST guidelines, commercial sources, and industry organizations.
       General information security specifications should be reviewed for applicability to the
       system being acquired. These specifications may provide information about
       overlooked areas. They can also save time because they provide language that can be
       used directly. However, care should be taken when selecting features, procedures, and
       assurances from these sources. The items may be grouped in these documents based
       on interdependencies among the items. It is necessary to understand the features,
       procedures, assurances, and groupings before specifying them separately.
       Each specification must be justified from the requirements analysis, specifically from
       the risk assessment. Safeguards recommended by a general source should be
       considered, but they should not be included in an RFP if the risk assessment does not
       support them.

   o Federally Mandated Specifications
       Agencies must also include additional specifications in the RFP, as required by law.
       These are often referred to as directed specifications. All federal agencies must ensure
       that systems comply with applicable federal policies and FIPS publications. Agencies
       may require directed specifications, which are official policies issued with the
       concurrence of organization’s legal and acquisition officials.
       Directed specifications must be incorporated in an RFP or other applicable
       acquisition document if the system being acquired matches the criteria in the directed
       specification. It is very important to be aware of directed specifications.


                                           F-3
           It is the acquiring agency’s responsibility to incorporate applicable law, regulations,
           and policy in the RFP. In addition to mandates affecting the entire Executive Branch,
           each department and independent agency has its own set of directives, orders, and
           standards.
           Merely citing the requirements separately from technical specifications has proven to
           be inadequate. Leaving it up to the development contractor to interpret policy does
           not work. Rather, relevant policy and guidance should be interpreted or at least
           referenced in the technical security specifications.
           Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) publications may be found at the
           NIST Computer Security Resource Center (http://csrc.nist.gov). Applicable OMB
           circulars, memorandums, and policy documents may be found at
           http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb.
           The National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act of 1995 (Public Law [P.L.]
           104-113) directs federal government departments and agencies to use, when practical,
           technical industry standards that are developed in voluntary, consensus-based
           standards bodies.
           It is incumbent on the acquisition initiator to know what federally mandated
           specifications apply to the system(s) being procured. Many people erroneously
           believe that the contracting officer is responsible for this effort. Because these are
           technical issues, the responsibility is that of the acquisition initiator.

•   Proposal Evaluation
    The proposal evaluation process determines if an offer meets the minimum requirements
    described in the RFP and assesses the offeror’s ability to successfully accomplish the
    prospective contract. This effort involves a technical analysis of the merits of a proposal. As
    part of the Development / Acquisition phase, the acquisition initiator, working with the
    contracting officer, develops an evaluation plan to determine the basis for the evaluation and
    how it will be conducted. The evaluation itself is performed during the source selection phase
    of the acquisition. Information security should be addressed in the evaluation criteria to call
    attention to the importance of security to the government. Offerors study the RFP to
    understand what the government considers most important.

•   Developing an Evaluation Plan
    When evaluating information security features, it can be difficult to assess if the offer meets
    the minimum requirements or can successfully accomplish the prospective contract.
    Therefore, offerors should provide assurance to the government that hardware and software
    claims regarding information security features are true, and that the offeror can provide the
    proposed services. Because information security, like other aspects of computer systems, is a
    complex and important subject, the offeror’s assertions may not provide sufficient assurance.
    How assurances are provided may determine the government’s ability to adequately assess
    them. The SOW specifies the government’s requirements on the development of the system,
    including the assurance requirements. Assurance specifications typically include
    documentation that will be examined by the government. After award, if the government
    determines that more assurance is required, additional funding may be required to fully
    develop the system.


                                                F-4
    The determination of how the offerors will be required to provide assurance should be
    considered when developing the evaluation plan. This plan will be used to help develop RFP
    sections that provide instructions to the offerors and information about how the proposals
    will be evaluated and how source selection will be performed.
    As part of this process, a determination of security acceptance testing should be made. It may
    be important to coordinate security test and evaluation (ST&E) activities as part of
    acceptance as well as C&A to effectively manage the government’s efforts.
    A certain amount of test and evaluation may occur as part of proposal evaluation.
    Benchmarking and functional demonstrations can be employed. Benchmarking has included
    stress testing (e.g., response time, throughput), which is similar to some security testing.
    Selecting the breadth and depth of such benchmarking is a business decision. Both the
    government, as purchaser, and the offeror incur costs. Either party may decide that the costs
    are prohibitive. It may be possible to structure proposal evaluation to limit the number of
    proposals that receive intensive ST&E. For example, security functional demonstrations
    could be required of all offerors, whereas assurance and penetration testing could be applied
    to only the apparent selectee.
    There are significant differences among ST&E of existing products, systems to be developed,
    and services. Organizations will have some uncertainty about services and the systems to be
    developed. One approach is to consider the failure to deliver the proposed security functions,
    assurances, and services as a breach of contract for which various legal remedies exist. The
    government can structure the pre-award functional demonstrations so that they provide
    meaningful and consistent results for evaluation purposes.
    It is important that the threats to security and organizational security policy commitments be
    clearly articulated and that the proposed security measures be demonstrably sufficient for
    their intended purpose. Assurance should be based on an evaluation (active investigation) of
    the product or information system that is to be trusted. The validity of the documentation and
    of the resulting IT product or system should be measured by expert evaluators with
    increasing emphases on scope, depth, and rigor.
    Architecture and design have a significant impact on vulnerabilities and testing. Good design
    includes testability as criteria. The cost of ST&E can be minimized by an architecture and
    design that reduces the security impact of employing systems and services with unknown
    security properties. Security architecture and design should employ techniques (e.g.,
    encapsulation and isolation), and mechanisms (e.g., demilitarized zones and firewalls) to
    mitigate vulnerabilities and risks and the cost of ST&E.
    Security architecture that integrates countermeasures should be considered. These
    countermeasures include point solutions for individual networks (e.g., firewalls and intrusion
    detection systems [IDSs]), security information management (SIM) systems, and SIM
    integration with a secure network management system.

•   Items to Consider in the Evaluation Plan
    The remainder of this section presents ideas to help develop the information security portions
    of the evaluation plan.
    When the evaluation plan is developed, the functional and security alternatives may conflict
    with each other. For example, features that provide information security can conflict with
    those that provide ease of use. The government should clarify how offerors propose different


                                               F-5
    configurations and present conflicting options and trade-offs. However, care should be taken
    to keep the size of the proposal manageable to facilitate review and to minimize proposal
    preparation costs.
    Testing is one method of determining if the proposed system or product can meet the
    information security requirements. Depending on the nature of the system, testing can be part
    of the proposal evaluation, in the form of live test demonstrations or benchmarks, or it can be
    part of post-award acceptance testing. During the evaluation process, testing can be used at
    different times, depending on cost, technical, and acquisition integrity considerations.
    Expensive tests should be kept to a minimum to help control offeror proposal preparation
    costs. Not only do expensive proposals limit competition, but also the costs are ultimately
    passed to the government in higher contract costs.
    Information system testing, especially performance testing, should be performed with the
    information security features enabled.
    The more the acquisition initiator knows about the marketplace, the easier it is to develop an
    evaluation plan. However, proposals cannot be used for market research. The evaluation plan
    cannot be changed after the receipt of proposals. Additional information from other proposals
    cannot be used to modify the evaluation plan. It is worthwhile to investigate alternatives that
    could be offered to ensure the development of an evaluation scheme that reflects the true
    priorities of the government.

•   Special Contract Requirements
    Some elements in an RFP are information security-related but are not contained in the SOW
    or the evaluation criteria. These elements usually address rights, responsibilities, and
    remedies assigned to the parties of the contract. Often, such obligations survive the actual
    period of performance of the contract. Therefore, such elements are best addressed through
    specific contract clauses or requirements. The requirement for nondisclosure of information
    obtained during the course of the contract is one example.




                                                F-6
APPENDIX G - ADDITIONAL GRAPHICAL VIEWS OF SECURITY
WITHIN SDLC




                           G-1
G-2
