      Withdrawn NIST Technical Series Publication

                                           Warning Notice

The attached publication has been withdrawn (archived), and is provided solely for historical purposes.
It may have been superseded by another publication (indicated below).

Withdrawn Publication
Series/Number            NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-124 Revision 1
Title                    Guidelines for Managing the Security of Mobile Devices in the Enterprise
Publication Date(s)      June 21, 2013
Withdrawal Date          May 17, 2023
Withdrawal Note          NIST SP 800-124 Rev. 1 is superseded in its entirety by NIST SP 800-124r2
Superseding Publication(s) (if applicable)

The attached publication has been superseded by the following publication(s):
Series/Number            NIST SP 800-124r2
Title                    Guidelines for Managing the Security of Mobile Devices in the Enterprise
Author(s)                Gema Howell; Joshua M. Franklin; Vincent Sritapan; Murugiah Souppaya;
                         Karen Scarfone
Publication Date(s)      May 2023
URL/DOI                  https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-124r2
Additional Information (if applicable)
Contact                  Computer Security Division (Information Technology Laboratory)
Latest revision of the
attached publication
Related Information      https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-124/rev-2/final
Withdrawal
Announcement Link




Date updated: May 17, 2023
                NIST Special Publication 800-124
                                       Revision 1



    Guidelines for Managing the
Security of Mobile Devices in the
                     Enterprise

                                                        Murugiah Souppaya
                                                           Karen Scarfone


                                  http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-124r1



    This version supersedes http://www.nist.gov/customcf/get_pdf.cfm?pub_id=890048




   C O M P U T E R                     S E C U R I T Y
                     NIST Special Publication 800-124
                                            Revision 1


    Guidelines for Managing the
Security of Mobile Devices in the
                     Enterprise
                                                                Murugiah Souppaya
                                                          Computer Security Division
                                                  Information Technology Laboratory

                                                                        Karen Scarfone
                                                                 Scarfone Cybersecurity


                                        http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-124r1



   This version supersedes http://www.nist.gov/customcf/get_pdf.cfm?pub_id=890048

                                                                               June 2013




                                                           U.S. Department of Commerce
                                                          Cameron F. Kerry, Acting Secretary

                                              National Institute of Standards and Technology
 Patrick D. Gallagher, Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology and Director
                               GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE




                                                Authority

This publication has been developed by NIST to further its statutory responsibilities under the
Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA), Public Law (P.L.) 107-347. NIST is
responsible for developing information security standards and guidelines, including minimum
requirements for Federal information systems, but such standards and guidelines shall not apply
to national security systems without the express approval of appropriate Federal officials
exercising policy authority over such systems. This guideline is consistent with the requirements
of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, Section 8b(3), Securing Agency
Information Systems, as analyzed in Circular A-130, Appendix IV: Analysis of Key Sections.
Supplemental information is provided in Circular A-130, Appendix III, Security of Federal
Automated Information Resources.

Nothing in this publication should be taken to contradict the standards and guidelines made
mandatory and binding on Federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under statutory
authority. Nor should these guidelines be interpreted as altering or superseding the existing
authorities of the Secretary of Commerce, Director of the OMB, or any other Federal official.
This publication may be used by nongovernmental organizations on a voluntary basis and is not
subject to copyright in the United States. Attribution would, however, be appreciated by NIST.

 National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-124 Revision 1
         Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 800-124 Rev. 1, 29 pages (June 2013)
      This version supersedes http://www.nist.gov/customcf/get_pdf.cfm?pub_id=890048
                                       CODEN: NSPUE2
                          http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-124r1

 Certain commercial entities, equipment, or materials may be identified in this document in order to
 describe an experimental procedure or concept adequately. Such identification is not intended to imply
 recommendation or endorsement by NIST, nor is it intended to imply that the entities, materials, or
 equipment are necessarily the best available for the purpose.
 There may be references in this publication to other publications currently under development by NIST
 in accordance with its assigned statutory responsibilities. The information in this publication, including
 concepts and methodologies, may be used by Federal agencies even before the completion of such
 companion publications. Thus, until each publication is completed, current requirements, guidelines,
 and procedures, where they exist, remain operative. For planning and transition purposes, Federal
 agencies may wish to closely follow the development of these new publications by NIST.
 Organizations are encouraged to review all draft publications during public comment periods and
 provide feedback to NIST. All NIST Computer Security Division publications, other than the ones
 noted above, are available at http://csrc.nist.gov/publications.


                   Comments on this publication may be submitted to:

                         National Institute of Standards and Technology
               Attn: Computer Security Division, Information Technology Laboratory
                100 Bureau Drive (Mail Stop 8930) Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930




                                                     ii
                             GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



                     Reports on Computer Systems Technology

The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical
leadership for the Nation’s measurement and standards infrastructure. ITL develops tests, test
methods, reference data, proof of concept implementations, and technical analyses to advance the
development and productive use of information technology. ITL’s responsibilities include the
development of management, administrative, technical, and physical standards and guidelines for
the cost-effective security and privacy of other than national security-related information in
Federal information systems. The Special Publication 800-series reports on ITL’s research,
guidelines, and outreach efforts in information system security, and its collaborative activities
with industry, government, and academic organizations.


                                             Abstract

Mobile devices, such as smart phones and tablets, typically need to support multiple security
objectives: confidentiality, integrity, and availability. To achieve these objectives, mobile devices
should be secured against a variety of threats. The purpose of this publication is to help
organizations centrally manage the security of mobile devices. Laptops are out of the scope of
this publication, as are mobile devices with minimal computing capability, such as basic cell
phones. This publication provides recommendations for selecting, implementing, and using
centralized management technologies, and it explains the security concerns inherent in mobile
device use and provides recommendations for securing mobile devices throughout their life
cycles. The scope of this publication includes securing both organization-provided and
personally-owned (bring your own device, BYOD) mobile devices.


                                            Keywords

cell phone security; information security; mobile device security; mobility; remote access;
smartphone security; tablet security; telework




                                                 iii
                            GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



                                     Acknowledgments

The authors, Murugiah Souppaya of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
and Karen Scarfone of Scarfone Cybersecurity, wish to thank their colleagues who reviewed
drafts of this document and contributed to its technical content, including Tom Karygiannis,
Arnold Johnson, Joshua Franklin, and Adam Sedgewick of NIST. The authors especially
appreciate the contributions of Wayne Jansen, who co-authored the original version of this
publication. The authors also thank all the individuals and organizations that provided comments
on the publication, including Mike Grimm (Microsoft), Blair Heiserman (NIST), Peter Kierpiec,
Accenture, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), the Defense Information Systems Agency
(DISA), the Department of Energy, the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), the
Department of Justice (ISIMC), LMI, Motorola Solutions, the National Security Agency (NSA),
Research in Motion (RIM) Corporation, and the Wireless Federal Strategic Sourcing Initiative
(FSSI) Core Team.

Section 4 of this publication is based on Section 4 of NIST SP 800-111, Guide to Storage
Encryption Technologies for End User Devices [SP800-111] by Karen Scarfone, Murugiah
Souppaya, and Matt Sexton.


                                         Trademarks

All registered trademarks or trademarks belong to their respective organizations.




                                                iv
                                     GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



                                                 Table of Contents
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................ vi
1.    Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 1
       1.1     Purpose and Scope .................................................................................................. 1
       1.2     Audience .................................................................................................................. 1
       1.3     Document Structure .................................................................................................. 1
2.    Mobile Device Overview ................................................................................................... 2
       2.1     Defining Mobile Device Characteristics ..................................................................... 2
       2.2     High-Level Threats and Vulnerabilities ..................................................................... 3
               2.2.1 Lack of Physical Security Controls................................................................. 3
               2.2.2 Use of Untrusted Mobile Devices .................................................................. 4
               2.2.3 Use of Untrusted Networks ............................................................................ 4
               2.2.4 Use of Untrusted Applications ....................................................................... 5
               2.2.5 Interaction with Other Systems ...................................................................... 5
               2.2.6 Use of Untrusted Content .............................................................................. 6
               2.2.7 Use of Location Services ............................................................................... 6
3.    Technologies for Mobile Device Management................................................................ 7
       3.1     Components and Architectures................................................................................. 7
       3.2     Capabilities ............................................................................................................... 8
4.    Security for the Enterprise Mobile Device Solution Life Cycle ................................... 10
       4.1     Initiation .................................................................................................................. 10
               4.1.1 Restrictions on Mobile Devices and Access Levels ..................................... 11
               4.1.2 Additional User Requirements ..................................................................... 12
       4.2     Development .......................................................................................................... 12
       4.3     Implementation ....................................................................................................... 13
       4.4     Operations and Maintenance .................................................................................. 14
       4.5     Disposal.................................................................................................................. 15
Appendix A— Supporting NIST SP 800-53 Security Controls and Publications................ 16
Appendix B— Acronyms and Abbreviations........................................................................ 20
Appendix C— Resources....................................................................................................... 21




                                                                v
                                    GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



Executive Summary

Mobile devices typically need to support multiple security objectives: confidentiality, integrity, and
availability. To achieve these objectives, mobile devices should be secured against a variety of threats.
General security recommendations for any IT technology are provided in NIST Special Publication (SP)
800-53, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations [SP800-53].
Specific recommendations for securing mobile devices are presented in this publication and are intended
to complement the controls specified in SP 800-53. Also, see Government Accountability Office (GAO)
report GAO-12-757 [GAO-12-757] for additional information on mobile device security for Federal
agencies.

This publication provides recommendations for securing particular types of mobile devices, such as smart
phones and tablets. Laptops are specifically excluded from the scope of this publication because the
security controls available for laptops today are quite different than those available for smart phones,
tablets, and other mobile device types. Mobile devices with minimal computing capability, such as the
most basic cell phones, are also out of scope because of the limited security options available and the
limited threats they face.

Centralized mobile device management technologies are increasingly used as a solution for controlling
the use of both organization-issued and personally-owned mobile devices by enterprise users. In addition
to managing the configuration and security of mobile devices, these technologies offer other features,
such as providing secure access to enterprise computing resources. There are two basic approaches to
centralized mobile device management: use a messaging server’s management capabilities (sometimes
from the same vendor that makes a particular brand of mobile device operating system), or use a product
from a third party, which is designed to manage one or more brands of mobile device operating system. It
is outside the scope of this publication to provide any recommendations for one approach over the other;
both approaches can provide the necessary centralized management functionality.

Organizations should implement the following guidelines to improve the security of their mobile devices.

Organizations should have a mobile device security policy.

A mobile device security policy should define which types of the organization’s resources may be
accessed via mobile devices, which types of mobile devices are permitted to access the organization’s
resources, the degree of access that various classes of mobile devices may have—for example,
organization-issued devices versus personally-owned (bring your own device) devices—and how
provisioning should be handled. It should also cover how the organization's centralized mobile device
management servers are administered, how policies in those servers are updated, and all other
requirements for mobile device management technologies. The mobile device security policy should be
documented in the system security plan. To the extent feasible and appropriate, the mobile device security
policy should be consistent with and complement security policy for non-mobile systems.

Organizations should develop system threat models for mobile devices and the resources that are
accessed through the mobile devices.

Mobile devices often need additional protection because their nature generally places them at higher
exposure to threats than other client devices (for example, desktop and laptop devices only used within
the organization’s facilities and on the organization’s networks). Before designing and deploying mobile
device solutions, organizations should develop system threat models. Threat modeling helps organizations
to identify security requirements and to design the mobile device solution to incorporate the controls
needed to meet the security requirements. Threat modeling involves identifying resources of interest and


                                                    vi
                                      GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



the feasible threats, vulnerabilities, and security controls related to these resources, then quantifying the
likelihood of successful attacks and their impacts, and finally analyzing this information to determine
where security controls need to be improved or added.

Organizations deploying mobile devices should consider the merits of each provided security
service, determine which services are needed for their environment, and then design and acquire
one or more solutions that collectively provide the necessary services.

Most organizations do not need all of the possible security services provided by mobile device solutions.
Categories of services to be considered include the following:

     General policy: enforcing enterprise security policies on the mobile device, such as restricting
      access to hardware and software, managing wireless network interfaces, and automatically
      monitoring, detecting, and reporting when policy violations occur.
     Data communication and storage: supporting strongly encrypted data communications and data
      storage, wiping the device before reissuing it, and remotely wiping the device if it is lost or stolen
      and is at risk of having its data recovered by an untrusted party.
     User and device authentication: requiring device authentication and/or other authentication
      before accessing organization resources, resetting forgotten passwords remotely, automatically
      locking idle devices, and remotely locking devices suspected of being left unlocked in an
      unsecured location.
     Applications: restricting which app stores may be used and which applications may be installed,
      restricting the permissions assigned to each application, installing and updating applications,
      restricting the use of synchronization services, verifying digital signatures on applications, and
      distributing the organization’s applications from a dedicated mobile application store.
Organizations should implement and test a pilot of their mobile device solution before putting the
solution into production.

Aspects of the solution that should be evaluated for each type of mobile device include connectivity,
protection, authentication, application functionality, solution management, logging, and performance.
Another important consideration is the security of the mobile device implementation itself; at a minimum,
all components should be updated with the latest patches and configured following sound security
practices. Also, use of jailbroken or rooted mobile devices should be automatically detected when
feasible. Finally, implementers should ensure that the mobile device solution does not unexpectedly “fall
back” to default settings for interoperability or other reasons.

Organizations should fully secure each organization-issued mobile device before allowing a user to
access it.

This ensures a basic level of trust in the device before it is exposed to threats. For any already-deployed
organization-issued mobile device with an unknown security profile (e.g., unmanaged device),
organizations should fully secure them to a known good state (for example, through deployment and use
of enterprise mobile device management technologies). Supplemental security controls should be
deployed as risk merits, such as antivirus software and data loss prevention (DLP) technologies.




                                                      vii
                                      GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



Organizations should regularly maintain mobile device security.

Helpful operational processes for maintenance include checking for upgrades and patches, and acquiring,
testing, and deploying them; ensuring that each mobile device infrastructure component has its clock
synced to a common time source; reconfiguring access control features as needed; and detecting and
documenting anomalies within the mobile device infrastructure, including unauthorized configuration
changes to mobile devices. Other helpful maintenance processes are keeping an active inventory of each
mobile device, its user, and its applications; revoking access to or deleting an application that has already
been installed but has subsequently been assessed as too risky to use; and scrubbing sensitive data from
mobile devices before reissuing them to other users.

Also, organizations should periodically perform assessments to confirm that their mobile device policies,
processes, and procedures are being followed properly. Assessment activities may be passive, such as
reviewing logs, or active, such as performing vulnerability scans and penetration testing.




                                                     viii
                                     GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



1.    Introduction

1.1     Purpose and Scope

The purpose of this publication is to help organizations centrally manage and secure mobile devices, such
as smart phones and tablets. (Laptops are out of the scope of this publication, as are mobile devices with
minimal computing capability, such as the most basic cell phones.) This publication provides
recommendations for selecting, implementing, and using centralized management technologies, and it
explains the security concerns inherent in mobile device use and provides recommendations for securing
mobile devices throughout their life cycles.

The scope of this publication includes both organization-provided and personally-owned (bring your own
device, BYOD) mobile devices. Classified systems, devices, data, applications, etc. are out of the scope of
this publication.

Evaluating the security of mobile device applications is also outside the scope of this publication.

1.2     Audience

This document is intended for Chief Information Officers (CIOs), Chief Information Security Officers
(CISOs), and security managers, engineers, administrators, and others who are responsible for planning,
implementing, and maintaining the security of mobile devices. It assumes that readers have a basic
understanding of mobile device technologies and enterprise security principles.

1.3     Document Structure

The remainder of this document is organized into the following sections and appendices:

 Section 2 provides an overview of mobile devices, focused on what makes them different from other
  computing devices, particularly in terms of security risk.
 Section 3 presents an introduction to technologies for centralized mobile device management.
 Section 4 discusses security throughout the mobile device life cycle. Examples of topics addressed in
  this section include mobile device security policy creation, design and implementation considerations,
  and operational processes that are particularly helpful for security.
 Appendix A lists the major controls from NIST Special Publication 800-53, Security and Privacy
  Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations that affect enterprise mobile device
  security.
 Appendix B provides an acronym and abbreviation list.
 Appendix C lists resources that may be useful for gaining a better understanding of mobile device
  security.




                                                     1
                                             GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



2.        Mobile Device Overview

This section gives an overview of mobile devices, such as smart phones and tablets. Laptops are
specifically excluded from the scope of this publication because the security controls available for laptops
today are quite different than those available for smart phones, tablets, and other mobile device types.
Mobile devices with minimal computing capability, such as the most basic cell phones, are also out of
scope because of the limited security options available and the limited threats they face.

This section discusses the features of mobile devices, focusing on what makes mobile devices different
from other computing devices, particularly in terms of security risk. This section also presents high-level
recommendations for mitigating the risks that these mobile devices currently face.

2.1       Defining Mobile Device Characteristics

Mobile device features are constantly changing, so it is difficult to define the term “mobile device”.
However, as features change, so do threats and security controls, so it is important to establish a baseline
of mobile device features. The following hardware and software characteristics collectively define the
baseline for the purposes of this publication:

 A small form factor
 At least one wireless network interface for network access (data communications). This interface uses
  Wi-Fi, cellular networking, or other technologies that connect the mobile device to network
  infrastructures with connectivity to the Internet or other data networks.
 Local built-in (non-removable) data storage
 An operating system that is not a full-fledged desktop or laptop operating system1
 Applications available through multiple methods (provided with the mobile device, accessed through
  web browser, acquired and installed from third parties)
The list below details other common, but optional, characteristics of mobile devices. These features do
not define the scope of devices included in the publication, but rather indicate features that are
particularly important in terms of security risk. This list is not intended to be exhaustive, and is merely
illustrative of common features of interest as of this writing.

 Network services:
      o    One or more wireless personal area network interfaces, such as Bluetooth or near-field
           communications
      o    One or more wireless network interfaces for voice communications, such as cellular
      o    Global Positioning System (GPS), which enables location services
 One or more digital cameras/video recording devices
 Microphone


1
      Operating systems are being introduced that will work for both smartphones/tablets and desktops/laptops. However, it is
      outside the scope of this publication to make recommendations for these devices. Once it has been determined how they
      should be secured, this publication will be updated accordingly.


                                                                2
                                            GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



 Storage:
      o   Support for removable media
      o   Support for using the device itself as removable storage for another computing device
 Built-in features for synchronizing local data with a different location (desktop or laptop computer,
  organization servers, telecommunications provider servers, other third party servers, etc.)
2.2       High-Level Threats and Vulnerabilities

Mobile devices typically need to support multiple security objectives. These can be accomplished through
a combination of security features built into the mobile devices and additional security controls applied to
the mobile devices and other components of the enterprise IT infrastructure. The most common security
objectives for mobile devices are as follows:

 Confidentiality—ensure that transmitted and stored data cannot be read by unauthorized parties
 Integrity—detect any intentional or unintentional changes to transmitted and stored data
 Availability—ensure that users can access resources using mobile devices whenever needed.
To achieve these objectives, mobile devices should be secured against a variety of threats. General
security recommendations for any IT technology are provided in NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-53,
Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations [SP800-53]. 2 Specific
recommendations for securing mobile devices are presented in this publication and are intended to
complement the controls specified in SP 800-53. See Appendix A of this document for a summary of SP
800-53 controls most closely related to mobile device security. Also, see Government Accountability
Office (GAO) report GAO-12-757 [GAO-12-757] for additional information on mobile device security
for Federal agencies.

Mobile devices often need additional protection because their nature generally places them at higher
exposure to threats than other client devices (e.g., desktop and laptop devices only used within the
organization’s facilities and on the organization’s networks). Before designing and deploying mobile
device solutions, organizations should develop system threat models for the mobile devices and the
resources that are accessed through the mobile devices. Threat modeling involves identifying resources of
interest and the feasible threats, vulnerabilities, and security controls related to these resources, then
quantifying the likelihood of successful attacks and their impacts, and finally analyzing this information
to determine where security controls need to be improved or added. Threat modeling helps organizations
to identify security requirements and to design the mobile device solution to incorporate the controls
needed to meet the security requirements. Major security concerns for these technologies that would be
included in most mobile device threat models are listed below.

2.2.1     Lack of Physical Security Controls

Mobile devices are typically used in a variety of locations outside the organization’s control, such as
employees’ homes, coffee shops, hotels, and conferences. Even mobile devices only used within an
organization’s facilities are often transported from place to place within the facilities. The devices’ mobile
nature makes them much more likely to be lost or stolen than other devices, so their data is at increased
risk of compromise. When planning mobile device security policies and controls, organizations should
2
      These recommendations are linked to three security categories—low, moderate, and high—based on the potential impact of
      a security breach involving a particular system, as defined in Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 199,
      Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems [FIPS199].


                                                              3
                                           GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



assume that mobile devices will be acquired by malicious parties who will attempt to recover sensitive
data either directly from the devices themselves or indirectly by using the devices to access the
organization’s remote resources.

The mitigation strategy for this is layered. One layer involves requiring authentication before gaining
access to the mobile device or the organization’s resources accessible through the device. A mobile
device usually has a single authenticator—not a separate account for each user of the device—as it is
generally assumed that the device only has one user.3 So there is no username, just a password, which is
often a PIN. More robust forms of authentication, such as token-based authentication, network-based
device authentication, and domain authentication, can be used instead of or in addition to the built-in
device authentication capabilities. A second mitigation layer involves protecting sensitive data—either
encrypting the mobile device’s storage so that sensitive data cannot be recovered from it by unauthorized
parties, or not storing sensitive data on mobile devices. Even if a mobile device is always in the
possession of its owner, there are other physical security risks, such as an attacker looking over a
teleworker’s shoulder at a coffee shop and viewing sensitive data on the mobile device’s screen (for
example, a password being entered). Finally, another layer of mitigation involves user training and
awareness, to reduce the frequency of insecure physical security practices.

2.2.2   Use of Untrusted Mobile Devices

Many mobile devices, particularly those that are personally owned (bring your own device, BYOD), are
not necessarily trustworthy. Most current mobile devices lack the root of trust features (e.g., trusted
platform modules, TPMs) that are increasingly built into laptops and other types of hosts. There is also
frequent jailbreaking and rooting of mobile devices, which means that the built-in restrictions on security,
operating system use, etc. have been bypassed. Organizations should assume that all mobile devices are
untrusted unless the organization has properly secured them and monitors their security continuously
while in use with enterprise applications or data.

There are several possible mitigation strategies related to use of untrusted mobile devices. One option is
to restrict or prohibit use of BYOD devices, thus favoring organization-issued devices. Another effective
technique is to fully secure each organization-issued mobile device; this gets the mobile device in as
trusted a state as possible, and deviations from this secure state can be monitored and addressed. There
are also technical solutions for achieving degrees of trust in BYOD devices, such as running the
organization’s software in a secure, isolated sandbox/secure container on the mobile device, or using
device integrity scanning applications.

2.2.3   Use of Untrusted Networks

Because mobile devices primarily use non-organizational networks for Internet access, organizations
normally have no control over the security of the external networks the devices use. Communications
systems may include wireless mechanisms such as Wi-Fi and cellular networks. These communications
systems are susceptible to eavesdropping, which places sensitive information transmitted at risk of
compromise. Man-in-the-middle attacks may also be performed to intercept and modify communications.
Unless it is absolutely certain that the mobile device will only be used on trusted networks controlled by
the organization, organizations should plan their mobile device security on the assumption that the
networks between the mobile device and the organization cannot be trusted.




3
    Some mobile devices provide support for multiple user accounts on a single device. The assumption in this publication that a
    mobile device will have a single user is not meant to preclude the use of a single device by multiple users.


                                                              4
                                            GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



Risk from use of untrusted networks can be reduced by using strong encryption technologies (such as
virtual private networks, VPNs) to protect the confidentiality and integrity of communications, as well as
using mutual authentication mechanisms to verify the identities of both endpoints before transmitting
data. Another possible mitigation is to prohibit use of insecure Wi-Fi networks, such as those running
known vulnerable protocols. Also, all network interfaces not needed by the device can be disabled, thus
reducing the attack surface.

2.2.4    Use of Untrusted Applications

Mobile devices are designed to make it easy to find, acquire, install, and use third-party applications from
mobile device application stores. This poses obvious security risks, especially for mobile device platforms
and application stores that do not place security restrictions or other limitations on third-party application
publishing. Organizations should plan their mobile device security on the assumption that unknown third-
party mobile device applications downloadable by users should not be trusted.

Risk from these applications can be reduced in several ways, such as prohibiting all installation of third-
party applications, implementing whitelisting to allow installation of approved applications only,
verifying that applications only receive the necessary permissions on the mobile device, or implementing
a secure sandbox/secure container that isolates the organization’s data and applications from all other data
and applications on the mobile device. Another possible mitigation is to perform a risk assessment on
each third-party application before permitting its use on the organization’s mobile devices.

It is important to note that even if these mitigation strategies are implemented for third-party applications,
users can still access untrusted web-based applications through browsers built into their mobile devices.
The risks inherent in this can be reduced by prohibiting or restricting browser access; by forcing mobile
device traffic through secure web gateways, HTTP proxy servers, or other intermediate devices to assess
URLs before allowing them to be contacted; or by using a separate browser within a secure
sandbox/secure container for all browser-based access related to the organization, leaving the mobile
device’s built-in browser for other uses.

2.2.5    Interaction with Other Systems

Mobile devices may interact with other systems in terms of data exchange (including synchronization)
and storage. Local system interaction generally involves connecting a mobile device to a desktop or
laptop wirelessly or via a cable for syncing. It can also involve tethering, such as using one mobile device
to provide network access for another mobile device.4 Remote system interaction most often involves
automatic backups of data to a cloud-based storage solution. When all of these components are under the
organization’s control, risk is generally acceptable, but often one or more of these components are
external. Examples include connecting a personally-owned mobile device to an organization-issued
laptop, connecting an organization-issued mobile device to a personally-owned laptop, connecting an
organization-issued mobile device to a remote backup service, and connecting any mobile device to an
untrusted charging station. In all of these scenarios, the organization’s data is at risk of being stored in an
unsecured location outside the organization’s control; transmission of malware from device to device is
also a possibility. There are also concerns regarding mobile devices exchanging data with each other.

The mitigation strategies depend on the type of attachment. Preventing an organization-issued mobile
device from syncing with a personally-owned computer necessitates security controls on the mobile
device that restrict what devices it can synchronize with. Preventing a personally-owned mobile device
4
    Organizations should have policies regarding the use of tethering. If an organization permits tethering, then it should ensure
    that the network connections involving tethering are strongly protected (e.g., communications encryption). If an organization
    prohibits tethering, then it should configure mobile devices so that they cannot be used for tethering.


                                                               5
                                     GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



from syncing with an organization-issued computer necessitates security controls on the organization-
issued computer, restricting the connection of mobile devices. Preventing the use of remote backup
services can possibly be achieved by blocking use of those services (e.g., not allowing the domain
services to be contacted) or by configuring the mobile devices not to use such services. Users should be
instructed not to connect their mobile devices to unknown charging devices; they should carry and use
their own charging devices. Finally, mobile devices can be prevented from exchanging data with each
other through logical or physical means (blocking use of services through configuration or physical
shielding, etc.)

2.2.6   Use of Untrusted Content

Mobile devices may use untrusted content that other types of devices generally do not encounter. An
example is Quick Response (QR) codes. They are specifically designed to be viewed and processed by
mobile device cameras. Each QR code is translated to text, typically a URL, so malicious QR codes could
direct mobile devices to malicious websites. This could allow for targeted attacking, such as placing
malicious QR codes at a location where targeted users gather.

A primary mitigation strategy is to educate users on the risks inherent in untrusted content and to
discourage users from accessing untrusted content with any mobile devices they use for work. Another
mitigation is to have applications, such as QR readers, display the unobfuscated content (e.g., the URL)
and allow users to accept or reject it before proceeding. Depending on the network configuration, it may
also be possible to use secure web gateways, HTTP proxy servers, or other intermediate devices to
validate URLs before allowing them to be contacted. In high security situations, it is also possible to
restrict peripheral use on mobile devices, such as disabling camera use in order to prevent QR codes from
being processed.

2.2.7   Use of Location Services

Mobile devices with GPS capabilities typically run what are known as location services. These services
map a GPS-acquired location to the corresponding businesses or other entities close to that location.
Location services are heavily used by social media, navigation, web browsers, and other mobile-centric
applications. In terms of organization security and personal privacy, mobile devices with location services
enabled are at increased risk of targeted attacks because it is easier for potential attackers to determine
where the user and the mobile device are, and to correlate that information with other sources about who
the user associates with and the kinds of activities they perform in particular locations

This situation can be mitigated by disabling location services or by prohibiting use of location services for
particular applications such as social networking or photo applications. Users may also be trained to turn
off location services when in sensitive areas. However, a similar problem can occur even if GPS
capabilities or location services are disabled. It is increasingly common for websites and applications to
determine a person’s location based on their Internet connection, such as a Wi-Fi hotspot or IP address
range. The primary mitigation for this is to opt out of such location services whenever possible.

Organizations should be aware that keeping location services enabled can also have positive effects on
information security. For example, different security policies can be enforced depending on whether the
mobile device is being used within the organization’s facilities or outside the organization’s facilities.




                                                     6
                                             GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



3.      Technologies for Mobile Device Management

Centralized mobile device management technologies are a growing solution for controlling the use of
both organization-issued and personally-owned mobile devices by enterprise users. In addition to
managing the configuration and security of mobile devices, these technologies offer other features, such
as providing secure access to enterprise computing resources. This section provides an overview of the
current state of these technologies, focusing on the technologies’ components, architectures, and
capabilities.

3.1        Components and Architectures

There are two basic approaches to centralized mobile device management: use a messaging server’s
management capabilities (often from the same vendor that makes a particular brand of mobile device
operating system), or use a product from a third party, which is designed to manage one or more brands of
mobile device operating systems. 5 It may be possible with the latter approach to have a single product that
can manage multiple brands of mobile device operating systems desired for use within an enterprise.
However, a product provided by a mobile device manufacturer may have more robust support for the
mobile devices than third party products. It is outside the scope of this publication to recommend one
approach over the other; both approaches can provide the necessary centralized management
functionality.

Architecturally, both approaches to centralized mobile device management are quite similar. The typical
solution has a straightforward client/server architecture. The enterprise contains one or more servers that
provide the centralized management capabilities, and one or more client applications are installed on each
mobile device 6 and configured to run in the background at all times. If the device is organization issued,
the client application typically manages the configuration and security of the entire device. If the device is
BYOD, the client application typically manages only the configuration and security of itself and its data,
not the entire device. The client application and data should be sandboxed from the rest of the device’s
applications and data in a secure container, both helping to protect the enterprise from a compromised
device and helping to preserve the privacy of the device’s owner.

The centralized mobile device management may make use of other enterprise services, such as domain
authentication services and VPN services. See Section 3.2 for additional information.

If there is not a centralized management solution, or certain mobile devices cannot use it, then mobile
devices have to be managed individually and manually. In addition to the additional resources expended,
there are two major security problems with this:

 The security controls provided by a mobile device often lack the rigor of those provided by a
  centralized mobile device management client application. For example, a mobile device often
  supports only a short passcode for authentication and may not support strong storage encryption. This
  will necessitate acquiring, installing, configuring, and maintaining a variety of third-party security
  controls that provide the missing functionality.
 It may not be possible to manage the security of the device when it is not physically present within
  the enterprise. It is possible to install utilities that manage devices remotely, but it will require
  significantly more effort to use such utilities to manually apply updates and perform other
  maintenance and management tasks with out-of-office mobile devices.
5
      Some mobile device management solutions also support the management of laptops, not just smart phones and tablets.
6
      The client applications may have been preinstalled by the vendor. Also, in some cases, no agent is needed because the OS
      provides APIs that can be leveraged to collect all of the necessary information and manage policies.


                                                                7
                                       GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



To avoid these problems, organizations may choose to prohibit the use of any mobile devices that are not
centrally managed.
3.2       Capabilities

This section describes security services commonly needed for security management of mobile devices.
These services may be provided by the mobile device operating system, enterprise mobile device
management (MDM) software, or other security controls. These services apply to the entire mobile device
(if it is fully managed) or to the mobile device’s secure sandbox/secure container (as explained in Section
3.1), unless explicitly noted otherwise. These services are equally relevant for centrally managed or
individually managed mobile devices.

Most organizations will not need all of the security services listed in this section. Organizations deploying
mobile devices should consider the merits of each security service, determine which services are needed
for their environment, and then design and acquire one or more solutions that collectively provide the
necessary services.

1. General policy. The centralized technology can enforce enterprise security policies on the mobile
   device, including (but not limited to) other policy items listed throughout Section 3.2. General policy
   restrictions of particular interest for mobile device security include the following:

       Restrict user and application access to hardware, such as the digital camera, GPS, Bluetooth
        interface, USB interface, and removable storage.
       Restrict user and application access to native OS services, such as the built-in web browser, email
        client, calendaring, contacts, application installation services, etc.
       Manage wireless network interfaces (Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, etc.)
       Automatically monitor, detect, and report when policy violations occur, such as changes from the
        approved security configuration baseline, and automatically take action when possible and
        appropriate
       Limit or prevent access to enterprise services based on the mobile device’s operating system
        version (including whether the device has been rooted/jailbroken), vendor/brand, model, or
        mobile device management software client version (if applicable). Note that this information may
        be spoofable.
2. Data Communication and Storage

       Strongly encrypt data communications between the mobile device and the organization. This is
        most often in the form of a VPN, although it can be established through other uses of secure
        protocols and encryption.
       Strongly encrypt stored data on both built-in storage and removable media storage. Removable
        media can also be “bound” to particular devices such that encrypted information can only be
        decrypted when the removable media is attached to the device, thereby mitigating the risk of
        offline attacks on the media.
       Wipe the device (to scrub its stored data) before reissuing it to another user, retiring the device,
        etc.




                                                       8
                                            GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



     Remotely wipe the device (to scrub its stored data) if it is suspected that the device has been lost,
      stolen, or otherwise fallen into untrusted hands and is at risk of having its data recovered by an
      untrusted party. 7 See Section 4.5 for more information on data scrubbing.
     A device often can also be configured to wipe itself after a certain number of incorrect
      authentication attempts.
3. User and Device Authentication

     Require a device password/passcode and/or other authentication (e.g., token-based authentication,
      network-based device authentication, domain authentication) before accessing the organization’s
      resources. This includes basic parameters for password strength and a limit on the number of
      retries permitted without negative consequences (e.g., locking out the account, wiping the
      device).
     If device account lockout is enabled or the device password/passcode is forgotten, an
      administrator can reset this remotely to restore access to the device.
     Have the device automatically lock itself after it is idle for a period (e.g., 5 minutes).
     Under the direction of an administrator, remotely lock the device if it is suspected that the device
      has been left in an unlocked state in an unsecured location.
4. Applications
     Restrict which app stores may be used.
     Restrict which applications may be installed through whitelisting (preferable) or blacklisting.
     Restrict the permissions (e.g., camera access, location access) assigned to each application.
     Install, update, and remove applications. Safeguard the mechanisms used to perform these
      actions. Keep a current inventory of all applications installed on each device.
     Restrict the use of operating system and application synchronization services (e.g., local device
      synchronization, remote synchronization services and websites).
     Verify digital signatures on applications to ensure that only applications from trusted entities are
      installed on the device and that code has not been modified.
     Distribute the organization’s applications from a dedicated mobile application store.




7
    Remote wipe is a fundamentally unreliable security control; for example, an attacker could access information on a device
    before it is wiped, or an attacker could power off a device to prevent it from receiving a remote wipe signal. Organizations
    should not rely on remote wipe as the sole security control for protecting sensitive data, but instead consider it to be one
    layer of a multi-layered approach to protection.


                                                               9
                                     GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



4.    Security for the Enterprise Mobile Device Solution Life Cycle

This section explains how the concepts presented in the previous sections of the guide should be
incorporated throughout the entire life cycle of enterprise mobile device solutions, involving everything
from policy to operations. The section references a five-phase life cycle model to help organizations
determine at what point in their mobile device solution deployments a recommendation may be relevant.
Organizations may follow a project management methodology or life cycle model that does not directly
map to the phases in the model presented here, but the types of tasks in the methodology and their
sequencing are probably similar. The phases of the life cycle are as follows:

 Phase 1: Initiation. This phase involves the tasks that an organization should perform before it starts
  to design a mobile device solution. These include identifying needs for mobile devices, providing an
  overall vision for how mobile device solutions would support the mission of the organization,
  creating a high-level strategy for implementing mobile device solutions, developing a mobile device
  security policy, and specifying business and functional requirements for the solution.
 Phase 2: Development. In this phase, personnel specify the technical characteristics of the mobile
  device solution and related components. These include the authentication methods and the
  cryptographic mechanisms used to protect communications and stored data. The types of mobile
  devices (brands, operating systems, etc.) to be authorized for use should also be considered, since
  they can affect the desired policies. Care should be taken to ensure that the mobile device security
  policy can be employed and enforced by all authorized clients. At the end of this phase, solution
  components are procured.
 Phase 3: Implementation. In this phase, equipment is configured to meet operational and security
  requirements, including the mobile device security policy documented in the system security plan,
  installed and tested as a pilot, and then activated on a production network. Implementation includes
  integration with other security controls and technologies, such as security event logging and
  authentication servers.
 Phase 4: Operations and Maintenance. This phase includes security-related tasks that an
  organization should perform on an ongoing basis once the mobile device solution is operational,
  including patching, log reviews, and attack detection.
 Phase 5: Disposal. This phase encompasses tasks that occur when a mobile device solution or its
  components are being retired, including preserving information to meet legal requirements, sanitizing
  media, and disposing of equipment properly.
This section highlights security considerations of particular interest for mobile device solutions. These
considerations are not intended to be comprehensive, nor is there any implication that security elements
not listed here are unimportant or unnecessary.

4.1     Initiation

The initiation phase involves many preparatory actions, such as identifying current and future needs, and
specifying requirements for performance, functionality, and security. A critical part of the initiation phase
is the development of a mobile device security policy for an organization. The section lists elements that a
mobile device security policy should contain and, where relevant, describes some of the factors that
should be considered when making the decisions behind each element. A mobile device security policy
should define which types of the organization’s resources may be accessed via mobile devices, which
types of mobile devices are permitted to access the organization’s resources, the degree of access that
various classes of mobile devices may have (for example, organization-issued devices versus personally-


                                                     10
                                    GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



owned devices), and how provisioning should be handled. It should also cover how the organization's
centralized mobile device management servers are administered, how policies in those servers are
updated, and all other requirements for mobile device management technologies. The mobile device
security policy should be documented in the system security plan. To the extent feasible and appropriate,
the mobile device security policy should be consistent with and complement security policy for non-
mobile systems.

4.1.1   Restrictions on Mobile Devices and Access Levels

An organization’s mobile device security policy often limits the types of mobile devices that may be used
for enterprise access; this is done for a variety of reasons, including security concerns and technology
limitations. For example, an organization might permit only organization-owned mobile devices to be
used. Some organizations have tiered levels of access, such as allowing organization-issued mobile
devices to access many resources, BYOD mobile devices running the organization’s mobile device
management client software to access a limited set of resources, and all other BYOD mobile devices to
access only a few web-based resources, such as email. This allows an organization to limit the risk it
incurs by permitting the most-controlled devices to have the most access and the least-controlled devices
to have only minimal access. Some organizations also maintain lists of approved mobile devices (by
operating system version, by brand/model of phone, etc.)

Each organization should make its own risk-based decisions about what levels of access should be
permitted from which types of mobile devices. Factors that organizations should consider when setting
mobile device security policy for this include the following:

 Sensitivity of work. Some work involves access to sensitive information or resources, while other
  work does not. Organizations may have more restrictive requirements for work involving sensitive
  information, such as permitting only organization-issued devices to be used. Organizations should
  also be concerned about the issues involved in remotely scrubbing sensitive information from BYOD
  mobile devices (see Section 4.5 for more information on data scrubbing).
 The level of confidence in security policy compliance. Meeting many of an organization’s security
  requirements can typically be ensured only if the organization controls the configuration of the
  mobile devices. For devices not running the organization’s mobile device management client
  software, some requirements can possibly be verified by automated security health checks conducted
  by the mobile device management server when mobile devices attempt to connect, but other
  requirements cannot be verified. Organizations may decide to require mobile devices to run the
  specified mobile device management software.
 Cost. Costs associated with mobile devices will vary based on policy decisions. The primary direct
  cost from a security perspective is issuing mobile devices and client software. There are also indirect
  costs in maintaining the security of mobile devices and in providing security-related technical support
  for users.
 Work location. Risks will generally be lower for devices used only in the enterprise environment
  than for devices used in a variety of locations.
 Technical limitations. Certain types of mobile devices or operating systems may be needed, such as
  for running a particular application. Also, an organization’s mobile device management client
  software may only support certain types of mobile devices (e.g., particular operating system
  versions).




                                                   11
                                             GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



 Compliance with mandates and other policies. Organizations may need to comply with mobile
  device-related requirements from mandates and other sources, such as a Federal department issuing
  policy requirements to its member agencies. An example of a possible requirement is restrictions on
  using mobile devices in foreign countries that have strong known threats against Federal agency
  systems; in such cases, it may be appropriate to issue “loaner” mobile devices or to prohibit mobile
  device use altogether.
Organizations may choose to specify additional security requirements that are tied to factors such as the
sensitivity of work. Many organizations require more stringent security controls for work situations that
are particularly high-risk, such as permitting the work only from organization-issued and secured mobile
devices, and requiring the use of multi-factor authentication for access to the mobile device and to
enterprise resources. Another possible security control is to migrate high-risk resources to servers that
assume responsibility for protecting them; for example, a mobile device could connect to a server that
holds sensitive data that the user needs to access, instead of the sensitive data being stored locally on the
mobile device. In high-risk situations, organizations may also choose to reduce risk by prohibiting mobile
devices from accessing particular types of information, such as sensitive personally identifiable
information (PII). 8

There are frequent changes in mobile device capabilities, the security controls available to organizations,
the types of threats made to different types of devices, and so on. Therefore, organizations should
periodically reassess their policies for mobile devices and consider changing which types of mobile
devices are permitted, what levels of access they may be granted, and which security controls are
required. Organizations should also be aware of the emergence of new types of mobile device solutions
and of major changes to existing mobile device management technologies, and ensure that the
organization’s policies are updated accordingly as needed.

4.1.2     Additional User Requirements

Organizations often have additional security considerations for mobile devices that, while helpful in
mitigating threats, cannot necessarily be directly enforced by the organization. Organizations should
educate users on the importance of these additional security measures and define users’ responsibilities
for implementing these measures in policy and mobile device agreements.

One possible security consideration involves wireless personal area networks (WPAN), which are small-
scale wireless networks that require no infrastructure to operate. Examples of WPAN technologies are
using a wireless keyboard or mouse with a computer, printing wirelessly, synchronizing a mobile device
with a computer wirelessly, and using a wireless headset or earpiece with a smart phone. Commonly used
types of WPAN technologies include Bluetooth and near-field communications. For devices within
proximity of significant threats, mobile device users should enable these technologies only when needed
to prevent misuse by unauthorized parties. Additional information on these security considerations is
available from NIST SP 800-114, User’s Guide to Securing External Devices for Telework and Remote
Access [SP800-114], and NIST SP 800-121 Revision 1, Guide to Bluetooth Security [SP800-121].

4.2       Development

Once the organization has established a mobile device security policy, identified mobile device needs, and
completed other preparatory activities, the next steps are to determine which types of mobile device
management technologies should be used and to design a solution to deploy. There are many
considerations for designing a solution, most of which are generally applicable to any IT technology;
8
      For more information on protecting PII, see NIST SP 800-122, Guide to Protecting the Confidentiality of Personally
      Identifiable Information (PII) [SP800-122].


                                                               12
                                             GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



some of these are covered in Section 3 of this document and others in NIST SP 800-53 [SP800-53]. This
section focuses on the technical security considerations that are most important for designing mobile
device management solutions. Major considerations include the following:

 Architecture. Designing the architecture includes the selection of mobile device management server
  and client software, the placement of the mobile device management server and other centralized
  elements, and the architecture of any virtual private network (VPN) solutions.
 Authentication. Authentication involves selecting device and/or user authentication methods,
  including determining procedures for issuing and resetting authenticators and for provisioning users
  and/or client devices with authenticators (see “Device provisioning” below). Authentication includes
  access to or integration with existing enterprise authentication systems.
 Cryptography. Decisions related to cryptography include selecting the algorithms for encryption and
  integrity protection of mobile device communications, and setting the key strength for algorithms that
  support multiple key lengths. 9 Federal agencies must use FIPS-approved algorithms contained in
  validated cryptographic modules when using cryptography to protect information.10
 Configuration requirements. This involves setting minimum security standards for mobile devices,
  such as mandatory host hardening measures and patch levels, and specifying additional security
  controls that must be employed on the mobile device, such as a VPN client.
 Device provisioning. It is important to determine how both new and existing devices will be
  provisioned with client software, authenticators, configuration settings, etc.
 Application vetting and certification requirements. This sets security, performance, and other
  requirements that applications must meet and determines how proof of compliance with requirements
  must be demonstrated.
The security aspects of the mobile device solution design should be documented in the system security
plan. The organization should also consider how incidents involving the mobile device solutions should
be handled and document those plans as well. 11

4.3       Implementation

After the mobile device solution has been designed, the next step is to implement and test a pilot of the
design, before putting the solution into production. Aspects of the solution that should be evaluated for
each type of mobile device include the following:

 Connectivity. Users can establish and maintain connections from the mobile device to the
  organization from the locations they are expected to use. Users can connect to all of the
  organization’s resources that they are permitted to and cannot connect to any other organization
  resources.


9
      NIST SP 800-21, Second Edition, Guideline for Implementing Cryptography in the Federal Government, presents
      guidelines for selecting, specifying, employing, and evaluating cryptographic protection mechanisms in Federal information
      systems. It defines a process for selecting cryptographic products and discusses implementation issues, including solution
      management, key management, and authentication. [SP800-21]
10
      The Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP) at NIST coordinates FIPS 140-2 testing; the CMVP Web site is
      located at http://csrc.nist.gov/cryptval/. See http://csrc.nist.gov/cryptval/des.htm for information on FIPS-approved
      symmetric key algorithms, and http://csrc.nist.gov/cryptval/dss.htm for information on digital signature algorithms. See
      FIPS 140-2, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, for more information. [FIPS140-2]
11
      For more information on incident handling, see [SP800-61].


                                                               13
                                             GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



 Protection. Information stored on the mobile device and communications between the mobile device
  and the organization are protected in accordance with the established requirements.
 Authentication. Authentication is required and cannot be readily compromised or circumvented. All
  device, user, and domain authentication policies are enforced.
 Applications. The applications to be supported by the mobile device solution function properly. All
  restrictions on installing applications are enforced. All restrictions on uninstalling applications (such
  as enterprise mobile device management software) are enforced.
 Management. Administrators can configure and manage all components of the solution effectively
  and securely. The ease of deployment and configuration is particularly important. Another concern is
  the ability of users to alter device/client software settings, which could weaken mobile device
  security.
 Logging. The mobile device solution logs security events in accordance with the organization’s
  policies. See NIST SP 800-92, Guide to Computer Security Log Management, for additional
  information on logging. Note that the security logging capabilities of mobile devices vary widely.
 Performance. All components of the solution provide adequate performance during normal and peak
  usage. It is important to also consider the performance of intermediate devices, such as routers and
  firewalls.
 Security of the Implementation. The mobile device implementation itself may contain
  vulnerabilities and weaknesses that attackers could exploit. Organizations with high security needs
  may choose to perform extensive vulnerability assessments against the mobile device solution
  components. At a minimum, all components should be updated with the latest available patches and
  configured following sound security practices. The organization should also take basic measures to
  prevent the user from circumventing the device’s security features. Also, jailbroken or rooted mobile
  devices should be automatically detected to prohibit their use, for cases in which detection is feasible.
 Default Settings. On a per-OS version basis, implementers should carefully review the default values
  for each mobile device setting and alter the settings as necessary to support security requirements.
  Implementers should also ensure that the mobile device solution does not unexpectedly “fall back” to
  insecure default settings for interoperability or other reasons.
Organizations should fully secure each organization-issued mobile device before allowing a user to access
it. Any already-deployed mobile device with an unknown security profile (e.g., unmanaged device)
should be fully secured to a known good state (for example, through deployment and use of enterprise
mobile device management technologies). Supplemental security controls should be deployed as risk
merits, such as antivirus software and data loss prevention (DLP) technologies.
4.4        Operations and Maintenance

Operational processes that are particularly helpful for maintaining mobile device security, and thus should
be performed regularly, include the following:

 Checking for upgrades and patches to the mobile device solution components (including mobile
  device infrastructure components, mobile device operating systems, and mobile device applications),
  and acquiring, testing, and deploying the updates 12


12
      Some mobile devices do not offer OS upgrades; even though a newer OS version might be generally available, it cannot be
      installed on a particular mobile device, often due to hardware limitations. This can significantly negatively impact the


                                                              14
                                             GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



 Ensuring that each mobile device infrastructure component (mobile device management servers,
  authentication servers, etc.) has its clock synced to a common time source so that its timestamps will
  match those generated by other systems
 Reconfiguring access control features as needed based on factors such as policy changes, technology
  changes, audit findings, and new security needs
 Detecting and documenting anomalies within the mobile device infrastructure through continuous
  monitoring, including unauthorized configuration changes to mobile devices. Such anomalies might
  indicate malicious activity or deviations from policy and procedures. Anomalies should be reported to
  other systems’ administrators as appropriate.
 Keeping an active inventory of each mobile device, its user(s), and its applications
 Providing training and awareness activities for mobile device users on threats and recommended
  security practices
 Revoking access to or deleting an application that has already been installed but has subsequently
  been assessed as too risky to use
 Scrubbing sensitive data from mobile devices before reissuing them to other users (see Section 4.5 for
  more information on data scrubbing)
Organizations should also periodically perform assessments to confirm that the organization’s mobile
device policies, processes, and procedures are being followed properly. Assessment activities may be
passive, such as reviewing logs, or active, such as performing vulnerability scans and penetration testing.
More information on technical assessments is available from NIST SP 800-115, Technical Guide to
Information Security Testing and Assessment [SP800-115].

4.5        Disposal

Before a mobile device component permanently leaves an organization (such as when a leased server’s
lease expires or when an obsolete mobile device is being recycled) or is reassigned to another user, the
organization should remove any sensitive data from the mobile device. The task of scrubbing all sensitive
data from storage devices such as hard drives and memory cards is often surprisingly difficult because of
all the places where such data resides and the increasing reliance on flash memory instead of magnetic
disks. See NIST SP 800-88, Guidelines for Media Sanitization [SP800-88], for additional information and
recommendations on removing data from mobile devices.




      security of the mobile devices, such as if they are “stuck” on a known vulnerable OS version that cannot be updated.
      Organizations should carefully consider the risks of using devices with outdated OS versions.


                                                                15
                                     GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



Appendix A—Supporting NIST SP 800-53 Security Controls and Publications

The major controls in the NIST Special Publication 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for
Federal Information Systems and Organizations control catalog that affect enterprise mobile device
security are:

AC-3, Access Enforcement
Related controls: AC-2, AC-4, AC-5, AC-6, AC-16, AC-17, AC-18, AC-19, AC-20,
AC-21, AC-22, AU-9, CM-5, CM-6, CM-11, MA-3, MA-4, MA-5, PE-3
AC-4, Information Flow Enforcement
Related controls: AC-3, AC-17, AC-19, AC-21, CM-6, CM-7, SA-8, SC-2, SC-5, SC-7, SC-18
AC-17, Remote Access
Related controls: AC-2, AC-3, AC-18, AC-19, AC-20, CA-3, CA-7, CM-8, IA-2, IA-3, IA-8, MA-4, PE-
17, PL-4, SC-10, SI-4
References: NIST Special Publications 800-46, 800-77, 800-113, 800-114, 800-121
AC-18, Wireless Access
Related controls: AC-2, AC-3, AC-17, AC-19, CA-3, CA-7, CM-8, IA-2, IA-3, IA-8, PL-4, SI-4
References: NIST Special Publications 800-48, 800-94, 800-97
AC-19, Access Control for Mobile Devices
Related controls: AC-3, AC-7, AC-18, AC-20, CA-9, CM-2, IA-2, IA-3, MP-2, MP-4, MP-5, PL-4, SC-7,
SC-43, SI-3, SI-4
References: NIST Special Publications 800-114, 800-124
AC-20, Use of External Information Systems
Related controls: AC-3, AC-17, AC-19, CA-3, PL-4, SA-9
References: FIPS Publication 199
AT-2, Security Awareness Training
Related controls: AT-3, AT-4, PL-4
References: NIST Special Publication 800-50
AU-2, Audit Events
Related controls: AC-6, AC-17, AU-3, AU-12, MA-4, MP-2, MP-4, SI-4
References: NIST Special Publication 800-92; http://csrc.nist.gov/pcig/cig.html; http://idmanagement.gov
CA-7, Continuous Monitoring
Related controls: CA-2, CA-5, CA-6, CM-3, CM-4, PM-6, PM-9, RA-5, SA-11, SA-12, SI-2, SI-4
References: NIST Special Publications 800-37, 800-39, 800-53A, 800-115, 800-137; US-CERT
Technical Cyber Security Alerts; DOD Information Assurance Vulnerability Alerts
CM-6, Configuration Settings
Related controls: AC-19, CM-2, CM-3, CM-7, SI-4



                                                    16
                                      GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



References: OMB Memoranda 07-11, 07-18, 08-22; NIST Special Publications 800-70, 800-128;
http://nvd.nist.gov; http://checklists.nist.gov/, http://www.nsa.gov
IA-2, Identification and Authentication (Organizational Users)
Related controls: AC-2, AC-3, AC-14, AC-17, AC-18, IA-4, IA-5, IA-8
References: HSPD 12; OMB Memorandum 04-04, 06-16, 11-11; FIPS Publication 201; NIST Special
Publications 800-63, 800-73, 800-76, 800-78; FICAM Roadmap and Implementation Guidance;
http://idmanagement.gov/
IA-3, Device Identification and Authentication
Related controls: AC-17, AC-18, AC-19, CA-3, IA-4, IA-5
IA-5, Authenticator Management
Related controls: AC-2, AC-3, AC-6, CM-6, IA-2, IA-4, IA-8, PL-4, PS-5, PS-6, SC-12, SC-13, SC-17,
SC-28
References: OMB Memorandum 04-04, 11-11; FIPS Publication 201; NIST Special Publications 800-73,
800-63, 800-76, 800-78 ; FICAM Roadmap and Implementation Guidance; http://idmanagement.gov/
MP-6, Media Sanitization
Related controls: MA-2, MA-4, RA-3, SC-4
References: FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publications 800-60, 800-88;
http://www.nsa.gov/ia/guidance/media_destruction_guidance/index.shtml
SC-4, Information in Shared Resources
Related controls: AC-3, AC-4, MP-6
SC-7, Boundary Protection
Related controls: AC-4, AC-17, CA-3, CM-7, CP-8, IR-4, RA-3, SC-5, SC-13
References: FIPS Publication 199; NIST Special Publications 800-41, 800-77
SC-8, Transmission Confidentiality and Integrity
Related controls: AC-17, PE-4
References: FIPS Publications 140-2, 197; NIST Special Publications 800-52, 800-77, 800-81, 800-113;
CNSS Policy 15; NSTISSI No. 7003
SC-28, Protection of Information at Rest
Related controls: AC-3, AC-6, CA-7, CM-3, CM-5, CM-6, PE-3, SC-8, SC-13, SI-3, SI-7
References: NIST Special Publications 800-56, 800-57, 800-111
SI-2, Flaw Remediation
Related controls: CA-2, CA-7, CM-3, CM-5, CM-8, MA-2, IR-4, RA-5, SA-10, SA-11, SI-11
References: NIST Special Publication 800-40, 800-128
SI-4, Information System Monitoring
Related controls: AC-3, AC-4, AC-8, AC-17, AU-2, AU-6, AU-7, AU-9, AU-12, CA-7, IR-4, PE-3, RA-
5, SC-7, SC-26, SC-35, SI-3, SI-7


                                                     17
                                    GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



References: NIST Special Publications 800-61, 800-83, 800-92, 800-94, 800-137
SI-7, Software, Firmware, and Information Integrity
Related controls: SA-12, SC-8, SC-13, SI-3
References: NIST Special Publications 800-147, 800-155


Information on these controls and guidelines on possible implementations can be found in the following
publications:
    •   SP 800-37 Rev. 1, Guide for Applying the Risk Management Framework to Federal Information
        Systems: A Security Life Cycle Approach
    •   Draft SP 800-40 Rev. 3, Guide to Enterprise Patch Management Technologies
    •   SP 800-41 Rev. 1, Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy
    •   SP 800-46 Rev. 1, Guide to Enterprise Telework and Remote Access Security
    •   SP 800-52, Guidelines for the Selection and Use of Transport Layer Security (TLS)
        Implementations
    •   SP 800-53 Rev. 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems and
        Organizations
    •   SP 800-53A Rev. 1, Guide for Assessing the Security Controls in Federal Information Systems
        and Organizations
    •   SP 800-57, Recommendation for Key Management
    •   SP 800-61 Rev. 2, Computer Security Incident Handling Guide
    •   SP 800-63 Rev. 1, E-Authentication Guideline
    •   SP 800-70 Rev. 2, National Checklist Program for IT Products: Guidelines for Checklist Users
        and Developers
    •   SP 800-73-3, Interfaces for Personal Identity Verification
    •   Draft SP 800-76-2, Biometric Data Specification for Personal Identity Verification
    •   SP 800-77, Guide to IPsec VPNs
    •   SP 800-78-3, Cryptographic Algorithms and Key Sizes for Personal Identification Verification
        (PIV)
    •   SP 800-81 Rev. 1, Secure Domain Name System (DNS) Deployment Guide
    •   Draft SP 800-83 Rev. 1, Guide to Malware Incident Prevention and Handling
    •   SP 800-92, Guide to Computer Security Log Management
    •   Draft SP 800-94 Rev. 1, Guide to Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems (IDPS)
    •   SP 800-111, Guide to Storage Encryption Technologies for End User Devices
    •   SP 800-113, Guide to SSL VPNs
    •   SP 800-114, User's Guide to Securing External Devices for Telework and Remote Access



                                                   18
                               GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



•   SP 800-121 Rev. 1, Guide to Bluetooth Security
•   SP 800-128, Guide for Security-Focused Configuration Management of Information Systems
•   FIPS 140-2, Security Re quirements for Cryptographic Modules
•   FIPS 197, Advanced Encryption Standard
•   FIPS 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems
•   FIPS 201-1, Personal Identity Verification (PIV) of Federal Employees and Contractors




                                              19
                                    GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



Appendix B—Acronyms and Abbreviations

Selected acronyms and abbreviations used in this publication are defined below.

BYOD            Bring Your Own Device
CMVP            Cryptographic Module Validation Program
DLP             Data Loss Prevention
FIPS            Federal Information Processing Standard
FISMA           Federal Information Security Management Act
GAO             Government Accountability Office
GPS             Global Positioning System
IT              Information Technology
ITL             Information Technology Laboratory
MDM             Mobile Device Management
NIST            National Institute of Standards and Technology
OMB             Office of Management and Budget
PII             Personally Identifiable Information
PIN             Personal Identification Number
QR              Quick Response
SP              Special Publication
TPM             Trusted Platform Module
VPN             Virtual Private Networking
Wi-Fi           Wireless Fidelity
WPAN            Wireless Personal Area Network




                                                   20
                                         GUIDELINES FOR MANAGING THE SECURITY OF MOBILE DEVICES IN THE ENTERPRISE



Appendix C—Resources

The lists below provide examples of resources that may be helpful in better understanding mobile device
security.

[FIPS140-2] FIPS 140-2, Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, May 2001.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsFIPS.html#140-2

[FIPS199] FIPS 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information
Systems, 2004. http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsFIPS.html#199

[GAO-12-757] GAO-12-757, Information Security: Better Implementation of Controls for Mobile
Devices Should Be Encouraged, September 2012. http://www.gao.gov/assets/650/648519.pdf

[SP800-21] NIST SP 800-21-1, Guideline for Implementing Cryptography in the Federal Government,
Second Edition, 2005. http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html#800-21

[SP800-53] NIST SP 800-53 Revision 4, Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems
and Organizations, 2013. http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html#800-53

[SP800-61] NIST SP 800-61 Revision 2, Computer Security Incident Handling Guide, 2008.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html#800-61

[SP800-88] NIST SP 800-88 Revision 1, Guidelines for Media Sanitization, 2012.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html#800-88

[SP800-111] NIST SP 800-111, Guide to Storage Encryption Technologies for End User Devices, 2007.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html#800-111

[SP800-114] NIST SP 800-114, User’s Guide to Securing External Devices for Telework and Remote
Access, 2007. http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html#800-114

[SP800-115] NIST SP 800-115, Technical Guide to Information Security Testing and Assessment, 2008.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html#800-115

[SP800-121] NIST SP 800-121 Revision 1, Guide to Bluetooth Security, 2012.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html#800-121

[SP800-122] NIST SP 800-122, Guide to Protecting the Confidentiality of Personally Identifiable
Information (PII), 2010. http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html#800-122


Mobile Device Security-Related Checklist Sites

                   Site                                                          URL
DISA Security Technical Implementation         http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/index.html
Guides (STIGs)
DISA Wireless (Smartphone/Tablet) STIGs        http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/net_perimeter/wireless/smartphone.html
NIST National Checklist Program Repository     http://web.nvd.nist.gov/view/ncp/repository




                                                         21
