                       Archived NIST Technical Series Publication
The attached publication has been archived (withdrawn), and is provided solely for historical purposes.
It may have been superseded by another publication (indicated below).

Archived Publication
Series/Number:             NIST Special Publication 800-33
Title:
                           Underlying Technical Models for Information Technology Security

Publication Date(s):       December 2001
Withdrawal Date:           August 1, 2018
Withdrawal Note:
                           Describes a model that pre-dates the Risk Management Framework
                           and Cybersecurity Framework.


Superseding Publication(s)
The attached publication has been superseded by the following publication(s):

Series/Number:
Title:


Author(s):


Publication Date(s):
URL/DOI:


Additional Information (if applicable)
Contact:                 Computer Security Division (Information Technology Laboratory)
Latest revision of the
attached publication:
Related information:     https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/risk-management/risk-management-framework-(rmf)-overview
                         https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework

Withdrawal
                         https://csrc.nist.gov/news/2018/nist-to-withdraw-eleven-outdated-sp-
announcement (link):
                         800-pubs




Date updated: ƵŐƵƐƚϭ͕ϮϬϭϴ
NIST Special Publication 800-33   Underlying Technical Models
                                  for Information Technology
                                  Security
Nisr
National Institute of Standards
                                  Recommendations of the National
and Technology
                                  Institute of Standards and Technology
Technology Administration
U.S. Department of Commerce

                                  Gary Stoneburner




         COMPUTER                                SECURITY
rhe          National Institute of Standards and Technology was established in 1988 by Congress to "assist industry in
         the development of technology             .   .   .   needed to improve product quality, to modernize manufacturing processes,
to ensure product reliability     .   .   .   and to facilitate rapid commercialization ... of products based on new scientific
discoveries."
        NIST, originally founded as the National Bureau of Standards in 1901, works to strengthen U.S. industry's
competitiveness; advance science and engineering; and improve public health, safety, and the environment. One
of the agency's basic functions is to develop, maintain, and retain custody of the national standards of
measurement, and provide the means and methods for comparing standards used in science, engineering,
manufacturing, commerce, industry, and education with the standards adopted or recognized by the Federal
Government.
        As an agency of the U.S. Commerce Department's Technology Administration, NIST conducts basic and
applied research in the physical sciences and engineering, and develops measurement techniques, test
methods, standards, and related services. The Institute does generic and precompetitive work on new and
advanced technologies. NIST's research facilities are located at Gaithersburg,                            MD 20899, and at Boulder, CO 80303.
Major technical operating units and their principal activities are listed below. For more information contact the
Publications cind Program Inquiries Desk, 301-975-3058.


Office of the Director                                                             Chemical Science and Technology
•   National Quality Program                                                       Laboratory
•   International and Academic Affairs                                             •   Biotechnology
                                                                                   •   Physical and Chemical Properties^
Technology Services                                                                •   Analytical Chemistry
•   Standards Services                                                             •   Process Measurements
•   Technology Partnerships                                                        •   Surface and Microanalysis Science
•   Measurement Services
•   Information Services                                                           Physics Laboratory
                                                                                   •   Electron and Optical Physics

Advanced Technology Program                                                        •   Atomic Physics
•   Economic Assessment                                                            •   Optical Technology

•   Information Technology and Applications
                                                                                   •   Ionizing Radiation

•   Chemistry and Life Sciences
                                                                                   • Time and Frequency'
                                                                                   • Quantum Physics'
•   Materials and Manufacturing Technology
•   Electronics and Photonics Technology
                                                                                   Manufacturing Engineering
                                                                                   Laboratory
Manufacturing Extension Partnership                                                •   Precision Engineering
Program                                                                            •   Manufacturing Metrology
•   Regional Programs
                                                                                   •   Intelligent Systems
•   National Programs
                                                                                   •   Fabrication Technology
•   Program Development
                                                                                   •   Manufacturing Systems Integration

Electronics and Electrical Engineering                                             Building and Fire Research
Laboratory                                                                         Laboratory
•   Microelectronics                                                               •   Applied Economics
•   Law Enforcement Standards                                                      •   Structures
•   Electricity                                                                    •   Building Materials
•   Semiconductor Electronics                                                      •   Building Environment
•   Radio-Frequency Technology'                                                    •   Fire Safety Engineering
•   Electromagnetic Technology'                                                    •   Fire Science
•   Optoelectronics'
                                                                                   Information Technology Laboratory
Materials Science and Engineering                                                  •   Mathematical and Computational Sciences^
Laboratory                                                                         •   Advanced Network Technologies
•   Intelligent Processing of Materials                                            •   Computer Security
•   Ceramics                                                                       •   Information Access
•   Materials Reliability'                                                         •   Convergent Information Systems
•   Polymers                                                                       •   Information Services and Computing
•   Metallurgy                                                                     •   Software Diagnostics and Conformance Testing
•   NIST Center for Neutron Research                                               •   Statistical   Engineering


'At Boulder,   CO 80303.
^Some elements at Boulder, CO.
NisT Special Publication 800 33   Underlying Technical Models for
                                  Information Technology Security

                                  Recommendation of the
                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology




                                  Gary Stonebumer




        COMPUTER SECURITY

                                  Computer Security Division
                                  Information Technology Laboratory
                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                  Gaithersburg,   MD 20899-8930




                                  December 2001




                                  U.S. Department of Commerce
                                  Donald L. Evans, Secretary


                                  Technology Administration
                                  Phillip J. Bond, Under Secretary of Commerce for Technology



                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                  Arden L. Bement, Jr., Director
                        Reports on Information Security Technology

The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical leadership for the Nation's measurement
and standards infrastructure. ITL develops tests, test methods, reference data, proof of concept
implementations, and technical analyses to advance the development and productive use of information
technology. ITL's responsibilities include the development of technical, physical, administrative, and
management standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive unclassified
information in Federal computer systems. This Special Publication 800-series reports on ITL's research,
guidance, and outreach efforts in computer security, and its collaborative activities with industry, government,
and academic organizations.




            Certain commercial entities, equipment, or materials may be identified in this document in
           order to describe an experimental procedure or concept adequately. Such identification is not
           intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and
                Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the entities, materials, or equipment are
                                     necessarily the best available for the purpose.




          National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-33
           Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 800-33, 27 pages (December 2001)
                                                CODEN: NSPUE2




                              U.S.   GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                             WASHINGTON: 2001


              For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
              Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov      —
                                             Phone: (202) 5 12-1 800          —
                                                                      Fax: (202) 5 12-2250
                               Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington,          DC 20402-0001
                                       Table of Contents

1.0 Introduction                                              1

2.0 Security Goal and Objectives                              2
3.0 Security Services Model                                   5

  3.1 Service Definitions                                     6
  3.2 Achieving Security Objectives                           7
4.0 Implementing Security Objectives - Distributed Systems   13
  4.1 Distributed Security Services                          13
  4.2 Security Domains                                       15
  4.3 Network Views                                          16
5.0 Risk Management                                          18
6.0 Definitions                                              20
APPENDIX A: References                                       24


                                          Table of Figures

Figure 2-1 Security Objective Dependencies                    3
Figure 3-1   Security Services Model                          5
Figure 3.2-1 Primary Availability Services                    8
Figure 3.2-2 Primary Integrity Services                       9
Figure 3.2-3 Primary Confidentiality Services                10
Figure 3.2-4 Primary Accountability Services                 11
Figure 3.2-5 Primary Assurance Services                      12
Figure 4.1-1 Distributed Security Services                   13
Figure 4.2-1 Overlapping Security Domains                    15
Figure 4.3-1 Distributed Intranet                            16
Figure 4.3-2 Compartmented Intranet                          16
Figure 4.3-3 "External" Transactions                         17
Figure 4.3-4 Detect and Contain                              17
Figure 5-1 Basics of Risk Mitigation - "Attacks"             18
Figure 5-2 Basics of Risk Mitigation - Errors/Mistakes       19
1.0 Introduction


Authority


This document has been developed by NIST in furtherance of its statutory responsibihties (under
the Computer Security Act of 1987 and the Information Technology Management Reform Act of
1996, specifically 15 U.S.C. 278 g-3(a)(5)). This is not a guideline within the meaning of (15
U.S.C. 278 g-3 (a)(3)).


    This document is recommended for use by Federal organizations which process sensitive
information,' and is consistent with the requirements of              0MB Circular A- 130, Appendix m.
The recommendations herein are not mandatory and binding standards. This document may be
used by non-governmental organizations on a voluntary basis. It is not subject to copyright.


Nothing in this document should be taken to contradict standards and guidelines made mandatory
and binding upon Federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under his statutory authority.
Nor should these recommendations be interpreted as altering or superseding the existing
authorities of the Secretary of Commerce, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget,
or any other Federal official.


Purpose


The purpose of this document is to provide a description of the technical foundations, termed
"models," that underlie secure information technology (IT).


The intent is to provide, in a concise form, the models that should be considered in the design
and development of technical security capabilities. These models encompass lessons learned,
good practices, and specific technical considerations.

Audience


The intended audience consists of both government and private sectors including:

      IT users desiring a better understanding of system security,

      Engineers and architects designing/building security capabilities, and

      Those developing guidance for others to use in implementing security capabilities.




'
    The Computer Security Act defines the term "sensitive information" as: any information, the loss, misuse, or
unauthorized access to or modification of which could adversely affect the national interest or the conduct of
Federal programs, or the privacy to which individuals are entitled under section 552a of title 5, United States Code
(the Privacy Act), but which has not been specifically authorized under criteria established by an Executive Order
or an Act of Congress to be kept secret in the interest of national defense or foreign policy.



SP 800-33                                                Page 1                                        December 2001
2.0 Security Goal and Objectives


Security Goal


The goal of information technology security is to:

      Enable an organization to meet all of its mission/business objectives by implementing
      systems with due care consideration of IT-related risks to the organization, its partners and
      customers.


Security Objectives


The security goal can be met through the following security objectives:

1 .   Availability (of systems and data for intended use only)


      Availability is a requirement intended to assure that systems work promptly and service is not
      denied to authorized users. This objective protects against:

          •   hitentional or accidental attempts to either:

              -    perform unauthorized deletion of data, or
              -    otherwise cause a denial of service or data.

          •   Attempts to use system or data for unauthorized purposes

      Availability is frequently an organization's foremost security objective.


2.    Integrity (of system and data)


      hitegrity has two facets:

          •   Data integrity (the property that data has not been altered in an unauthorized manner
              while in storage, during processing, or while in transit), or

          •   System integrity (the quality that a system has when performing the intended function
              in an unimpaired manner, free from unauthorized manipulation).

      Integrity is commonly an organization's most important security objective after availability.


3.    Confidentiality (of data and system information)


      Confidentiality is the requirement that private or confidential information not be disclosed to
      unauthorized individuals.    Confidentiality protection applies to data in storage, during
      processing, and while in transit.

      For many organizations, confidentiality is frequently behind availability and integrity in terms
      of importance. Yet for some systems and for specific types of data in most systems (e.g.,
      authenticators), confidentiality is extremely important.




SP 800-33                                         Page 2                                 December 2001

                                                                                                         J
4.   Accountability (to the individual level)


     Accountability is the requirement that actions of an entity may be traced uniquely to that
     entity.

     Accountability is often an organizational policy requirement and directly supports non-
     repudiation, deterrence, fault isolation, intrusion detection and prevention, and after-action
     recovery and legal action.


5.   Assurance (that the other four objectives have been adequately met)


     Assurance is the basis for confidence that the security measures, both technical and
     operational, work as intended to protect the system and the information it processes.                        The
     other four security objectives (integrity, availability, confidentiality, and accountability) have
     been adequately met by a specific implementation when:

        •      required functionality is present and correctly implemented,

        •      there is sufficient protection against unintentional errors (by users or software), and

        •      there is sufficient resistance to intentional penetration or by-pass.

     Assurance is essential; without it the other objectives are not met. However, assurance is a
     continuum; the amount of assurance needed varies between systems.

Security Objective hiterdependencies


The five security objectives are interdependent. Achieving one objective without consideration
of the others is seldom possible. This is depicted in Figure 2-1 and discussed below.




                                (confidentiality                         (   Integrity
                                                                                         )

                                                                                t
                                (    Integrity                           (confidentiality
                                                 )




                           ( Availability ^                                   (Accountability^



                  ^
                           >
                  (confidentiality
                                      A  Integrity
                                                      ^
                                                                       confidentiality       Integrity
                                     (                )            (                     (               ^




                                                           I
                                                     Assurance
                c

                              Figure 2-1 Security Objective Dependencies



SP 800-33                                                 Page 3                                             December 2001
The Figure 2-1 shows the following dependencies:

   Confidentiality is dependent on Integrity, in that if the integrity of the system is lost, then
there is no longer a reasonable expectation that the confidentiality mechanisms are still valid.


   Integrity is dependent on Confidentiality, in that if the confidentiality of certain information
is lost (e.g., the superuser password), then the integrity mechanisms are likely to be by-passed.



   AvailabiUty and Accountability are dependent on Confidentiality and Integrity, in that:

   •     if confidentiality is lost for certain informadon (e.g., superuser password), the

         mechanisms implementing these objectives are easily by-passable; and

   •     if system integrity is lost, then confidence in the validity of the mechanisms implementing

         these objectives is also lost.


   All of these objectives are interdependent with Assurance. When designing a system, an
architect or engineer establishes an assurance level as a target. This target is achieved by both
defining and meeting the functionality requirements in each of the other four objectives and
doing so with sufficient "quality." Assurance highlights the fact that for a system to be secure, it
must not only provide the intended functionality, but also ensure that undesired actions do not
occur.




SP 800-33                                        Page 4                                  December 2001
3.0 Security Services IVIodel


The underlying technical security services model is depicted in Figure 3-1 which shows the
primary services and supporting elements used in implementing an information technology
security capability, along with their primary relationships. The model also classifies the services
according to their primary purpose as follows:

•   Support    .       These services are generic and underlie most information technology security
    capabilities.

•   Prevent   .        These services focus on preventing a security breach from occurring.

•   Recover The services in this category focus on the detection and recovery from a security
                   .




    breach.




                                            Protected Communications
                           (safe from disclosure, substitution, modification,   & replay)

                                           Identification (and Naming)



                                        Crj'ptograpliic Key Management



                                             Security Administration


                                                System Protections
                             (least privilege, object reuse, process separation, ct(^.)




                                            Figure 3-1 Security Services Model


Section Roadmap - This section contains the following information:

•   definition for each of the services listed in the model; and

•   breakout of the model for each of the five security objectives, giving the primary services for
    implementing each objective.




SP 800-33                                                            Page 5                   December 2001
3.1   Service Definitions

Supporting:


Supporting services are, by their very nature, pervasive and inter-related with many other
services.   The supporting services are:
•     Identification (and naming) In order to implement many of the other services, it is essential
      that both subjects and objects be identifiable. This service provides the capability to uniquely
      identify users, processes, and information resources.

•     Cryptographic key management Cryptographic keys must be securely managed when
      cryptographic fimctions are implemented in various other services.

•     Security administration   The security features of the system need to be administered in order
      to meet the needs of a specific installation and to account for changes in the operational
      environment.

•     System protections Underlying the various security fiinctional capabilities is a base of
      confidence in the technical implementation. This represents the quality of the
      implementation firom both the perspective of the design processes used and the manner in
      which the implementation was accomplished. Some examples of system protections are:
      residual information protection (also known as object reuse), least privilege, process
      separation, modularity, layering, and minimization of what needs to be trusted.


Prevention:


These services can prevent the security breach from ever happening.

•     Protected communications In a distributed system, the ability to accomplish security
      objectives is highly dependent on trustworthy communications.      The protected
      communications service ensures the integrity, availability, and confidentiality of information
      while in transit. In most situations all three elements are essential requirements, with
      confidentiality being needed at least for authentication information.

•     Authentication Ensuring that a claimed identity is valid is extremely important. The
      authentication service provides the means to verify the identity of a subject.

•     Authorization The authorization service enables specification and subsequent management
      of the allowed actions for a given system.

•     Access control enforcement    When the subject requesting access has been validated for
      access to particular processes, enforcing the defined security policy s still necessary.   The
      access control enforcement service provides this enforcement, and firequently the enforcement
      mechanisms are distributed throughout the system.     It is not only the correctness   of the access
      control decision, but also the strength of the access control enforcement that determines the
                                Checking identity and requested access against access control lists
      level of security obtained.
      is a common access control enforcement mechanism. File encryption is another example of

      an access control enforcement mechanism.




SP 800-33                                          Page 6                                    December 2001
•   Non-repudiation System accountability depends upon the ability to ensure that senders
    cannot deny sending information and that receivers carmot deny receiving it. Non-
    repudiation is a service that spans prevention and detection. This service has been placed
    into the prevention category because the mechanisms implemented prevent the ability to
    successfully repudiate an action.    As a result, this service is typically performed at the point
    of transmission or reception.

•   Transaction privacv Both government and private systems are increasingly required to
    maintain the privacy of individuals using these systems. The transaction privacy service
    protects against loss of privacy with respect to transactions being performed by an individual.


Detection and Recovery:


Because no set of prevention measures is perfect, it is necessary to both detect security breaches
and to take actions to reduce their impact.

•   Audit The auditing of security relevant events is a key element for after-the-fact detection of
    and recovery from security breaches.

•   hitrusion detection and containment Detecting insecure situations is essential in order to
    respond in a timely manner. Also, detecting a security breach is of little use if no effective
    response can be initiated. The intrusion detection and contairmient service provides these
    two capabilities.

•   Proof of Wholeness hi order to determine that integrity has been compromised, the ability
    must exist to detect when information or system state is potentially corrupted. The proof of
    wholeness service provides this ability.

•   Restore "secure" state     When a security breach occurs, the system must be able to return to a
    state that is known to be secure.   That is the purpose for this service.

3.2 Achieving Security Objectives


The figures below show those services that are most important in achieving the following
security objectives:

    Figure 3.2-1 - Availability

    Figure 3.2-2 - Integrity

    Figure 3.2-3 - Confidentiality

    Figure 3.2-4 - Accountability

    Figure 3.2-5 - Assurance




SP 800-33                                        Page 7                                   December 2001
                                                                                    Prevent


                                                                                    Recover



     User
      or      <-       -^j^Authorizationj
    Process
                                  A

                          Access Control
                        k Enforcement                                                    Resource
                                                             Proof of     ]^
                                                            Wholeness    J
                      intrusion Detection
                       and Containment

                                                                   Restore
                                                                "Secure" State


                                   Protected Communications
                   (safe from disclosure, substitution, modification,   & replay)

                                  Identification (and Naming)



                               Cryptographic Key Management


                           Figure 3.2-1 Primary Availability Services
                                                                                    w
The primary availability services are those that directly impact the ability of the system to
maintain operational effectiveness.    One aspect of maintaining effectiveness is protection from
unauthorized changes or deletions by defining authorized access and enforcing this definition.
Mission effectiveness is also maintained by detecting intrusions, detecting a loss of wholeness,
and providing the means of returning to a secure state.




SP 800-33                                          Page 8                                December 2001
                                                                                                         I
                                                                                    Prevent


                                                                                    Recover   .




     User
      or               -^^Authorizatioi^
   Process



                           Access Control
                            Enforcement                                                  Resource
                                                             Proof of
                                                            Wholeness
                      Intrusion Detection
                       and Containment

                                                                    Restore
                                                                 "Secure" State


                                   Protected Communications
                   (safe from disclosure, substitution, modiflcation,   & replay)

                                   Identification (and Naming)



                                Cryptographic Key Management


                             Figure 3.2-2 Primary Integrity Services


The services that provide for availabihty also provide for integrity. This is because maintaining
or restoring integrity is an essential part of maintaining availability. Although availability is only
concerned with changes (or deletions) that impact mission availability, the practical reality is that
the applicable security mechanisms do not differentiate between purposes for the unauthorized
access nor between impacts of loss of wholeness.




SP 800-33                                          Page 9                               December 2001
                                                                                     Prevent


                                                   Transaction                       R.ecover
                                                     Privacy


      User
       or
                         ->- ^Authorizatioi^
     Process




                             Access Control
                              Enforcement




                                     Protected Communications
                     (safe from disclosure, substitution, modiflcation, <& replay)



                                    Identification (and Naming)



                                 Cryptographic Key Management


                           Figure 3.2-3 Primary Confidentiality Services
                                                                                     V
Once lost, confidentiality cannot be restored. Therefore, the detection and recovery services that
can play an important role in maintaining availability and integrity do not apply to
confidentiality.   The protection of communications from disclosure, the enforcement of
authorized read accesses, and the capability for privacy provide for confidentiality.




SP 800-33                                          Page 10                                 December 2001
                                                                                                           I
                                                                               Prevent


                                                                               Recover
                                                                    Non-
                                                                 repudiation
     User
      or
    Process                                                     Audit



                           Access Control
                            Enforcement                                              Resource




               A
                                  Identification (and Naming)



                               Cryptographic Key Management


                           Figure 3.2-4 Primary Accountability Services


Maintaining accountability for user actions is performed primarily by the audit and non-
repudiation services. Access control enforcement is also included as the primary generator of
records of user actions.




SP 800-33                                       Page 1                              December 2001
                                                                                         ^




                                   Protected Communications
                   (safe from disclosure, substitution, modiflcation,   & replay)




                r                   Security Administration


                                       System Protections                                '




                     (least privilege, object reuse, process separation, etc.)


                            Figure 3.2-5 Primary Assurance Services


Assurance is grounds for confidence that the security objectives are met and, as indicated in
section 2.0, encompasses both correct and sufficient security capabihties. This requires
consideration of both "what" is provided and "how" it is provided (the architecture, design, and
implementation). Also, as shown in the following section 4.1, assurance spans the system both
logically and physically. Clearly assurance is pervasive and can be viewed from several
perspectives.   From the perspective of specific security services, assurance is most impacted by
those services that directly impact the correct, on-going security capabilities of the system. In
this regard the nature of the authentication being performed and the strength of the access control

enforcement capability are extremely important. Additionally, the presence of an effective
restoration capability can provide significant grounds for confidence.           The audit service can be of
great benefit in achieving assurance if used effectively and with recognition for its weaknesses.
Finally, good security administration and system protections are essential to an objective basis
for confidence in the security capabilities of a system.




SP 800-33                                         Page 12                                      December 2001
4.0 Implementing Security Objectives - Distributed Systems


This section describes the following aspects of distributed systems:

   •   Security services distributed physically and logically

   •   Security domains

   •   Network views

4.1 Distributed Security Services


Figure 4- 1 depicts the distributed security services and how services rest upon other services
because they are logically and physically distributed across the network. Additionally, the figure
shows that all services ultimately depend on operating system mechanisms, that system assurance
is a key element "surrounding" the entire capability, and that system management is another

important aspect of an effective security capability.


                                               System Assurance

                                           System Management




                                 User-Application and Client-Server
                                           Security Services



                                              Middleware
                                           Security Services

                                 rz:                                     71
                                              Lower-Layer
                                            Security Services
                Multi-Layer,
                Distributed, System Security Services
                (co.operating elements distributed physically
                across network and logically across layers)       Operating System
                                                                   Security Services
                                                    (underlie all distributed services)



                   System Assurance is the grounds for confidence
                        (reasons to expect quality and dependability)


                            Figure 4.1-1 Distributed Security Services


Distributed security services depend on the foundations of system assurance and operating
system security services.




SP 800-33                                           Page 13                               December 2001
    a.  System assurance Assurance is "grounds for confidence that an entity meets its security
                           .




    objectives" [1]. Assurance can also be described as the system characteristic enabUng
    confidence that the system fulfills its intended purpose.    A secure system implementation
    must be of sufficient quality to provide confidence in the correct operation of security
    mechanisms and in the system's resistance to deliberate or unintentional penetration.
    Technology has been developed to produce and measure the assurance of information
    systems. System assurance can be increased by:

         •   Applying less complex technical solutions

         •   Using more trustworthy components

         •   Architecting to limit the impact of penetrations, both by limiting the extent of a
             vulnerability or by implementing detection and recovery capabilities

         •   Integrating technology in the context of the operational environment

         •   Taking advantage of non-technical countermeasures.


    As depicted in Figure 4.1-1, system assurance both supports the architecture and spans it.

    b.   Operating system security services   .   Whenever such underlying services exist, system
    security ultimately depends on the underlying operating system services and mechanisms. If
    these underlying supports are weak, then security can be bypassed or subverted. System
    security can be no stronger than the underlying operating system.     The graphic depicts a
    separate OS security "layer" to highlight this essential concept.


While some services reside in a particular logical level of the system hierarchy, many are
implemented via mechanisms that span the system both physically and logically. This is depicted
in Figure 4.1-1 by the logical levels of Application/Client-Server, Middleware, and lower layers.
Each layer can depend on capabilities supplied by lower layers or, as shown, directly on
operating system mechanisms.


Additionally, the figure shows that some distributed services do not exist at any one level, but are
implemented by cooperating mechanisms at several levels.         Common examples of distributed
services are identification and authentication (I&A). The user interface, typically part of
application level software (for example a Telnet client), must interact with the user to obtain the
necessary information. The information must then be passed to a process that will determine
whether the supplied data is correct. This process is likely to be running at the operating system
level, or it might be at the presentation, session, or even network levels of the Organization for

International Standardization (ISO) open system interconnect (OSI) model [3,4].       It is not

uncommon for the information to be collected on one machine and transmitted across the
network to another machine (a network authentication server for example). This I&A example
with a network authentication server results in the security services being physically distributed
across at least two machines and requiring the cooperative efforts of mechanisms residing at all
seven levels of the OSI.




SP 800-33                                          Page 14                              December 2001
4.2 Security Domains


A foundation for IT security is the concept of security domains and enforcement of data and
process flow restrictions within and between these domains.


A domain is a set of active entities (person, process, or device), their data objects, and a common
security poHcy.


Domains can be logical as well as physical; dividing an organization's computing enterprise into
domains is analogous to building fences (various types of security barriers), placing gates within
the fences (e.g., firewalls, gateways, and internal process separation), and assigning guards to
control traffic through the gates (technical and procedural security services).


Domains are defined using factors that include one or more of the following:
  •   Physical (e.g., building, campus, region, etc.)

  •   Business process (e.g., persormel, finance, etc.)

  •   Security mechanisms (e.g., Microsoft    NT domain, Sun Network hiformation System
      (NIS), etc.)


The key elements to be addressed in defining domains are flexibility, tailored protection, domain
interrelationships, and the use of multiple perspectives to determine what is important in
information technology security.




                          Figure 4.2-1 Overlapping Security Domains




SP 800-33                                      Page 15                                December 2001
                                                                                               .




4.3 Network Views


Distributed Intranets


An organization's intranet is typically dispersed physically and interconnected by circuits that are
frequently not controlled by the organization. This is depicted in Figure 4.3-1


                            Intranet
                 (Under organization's authority)           Externally controlled
                                                        dedicated bandwidth circuits


                                                                                Intranet
                         Externally controlled                     (Under organization's authority)
                        dedicated leased circuits

                                                         Exterpajli^pRtrolled
                                                        Wide-area networking
                                Intranet
                    (Under organization's authority)




                           Authority = can specify and enfbrce policy and procedures
                                                                                       j


                                   Figure 4.3-1 Distributed Intranet


Compartmentalizing the Litranet


Internally, an organization should consider compartmenting its intranet in a manner analogous to
the watertight doors on a ship. This supports the enforcement of organizational policies and the
limitation of damage in the event of a security breach.            Figure 4.3-2 illustrates this concept.




                             Figure 4.3-2 Compartmentalized Intranet




SP 800-33                                              Page 16                                        December 2001
"Inside" versus "Outside


"External" is no longer easy to determine. Distinctions can be made between transactions that
are truly from "outside" and those that are the equivalent of being internal.   As shown in Figure
4.3-3, the use of end-to-end encrypted paths is a possible solution for the latter.


                   Unencrypted




                                 Figure 4.3-3 "External" Transactions


Detect and Contain
The ability to detect and to respond to a security breach is an essential part of an effective
information technology security capability. This can be achieved by incorporating detection,
analysis, and response components into the organization's intranet, as depicted in Figure 4.3-4.




                                   Figure 4.3-4 Detect and Contain




SP 800-33                                      Page 17                                 December 2001
                                                                                     ^




5.0 Risk Management


This section gives an overview of risk management for the purpose of highhghting where
teclmology capabihties are best apphed in mitigating risk. As indicated in the glossary, the
following definitions are used:

  Vulnerability    A weakness in system security procedures, design, implementation, internal controls,
                   etc., that could be accidentally triggered or intentionally exploited and result in a

                   violation of the system's security policy.

 Threat-source     Either (1) intent and method targeted at the intentional exploitation of a vulnerability
                   or (2) the situation and method that may accidentally trigger a vulnerability.

 Threat            The potential for a "threat source" to exploit (intentional) or trigger (accidental) a
                   specific vulnerability.

 Risk              The net mission/business impact (probability of occurrence combined with impact)
                   from a particular threat source exploiting, or triggering, a particular information
                   technology vulnerability. IT related-risks arise from legal liability or
                   mission/business loss due to:

                   -   Unauthorized (malicious, non-malicious, or accidental) disclosure, modification,
                       or destruction of information.
                   -   Non-malicious errors and omissions.
                       IT disruptions due to natural or man-made disasters.
                   -   Failure to exercise due care and diligence in IT implementation and operation.


Figure 5-1 shows where risk mitigation is accomplished in the face of intentional "attacks." The
term "attack" is placed in quotation marks because the issue is "intentional," not malicious.               It is

relatively common for security to sometimes be intentionally "attacked" for non-malicious
purposes such as "just getting the job done."




                                                                 f Vulnerability \
                                                                 I
                                                                 V
                                                                     to Attack
                                                                       Exists
                                                                                 1
                                                                                 y
                                                                                     —    &



                                                                                     UNacceptable
                                                                                         Risk




                       Figure 5-1 Basics of Risk Mitigation - "Attacks"



SP 800-33                                          Page 18                                          December 2001
The mitigation of risk from attack by technical means can be accomphshed at the following
points:

    -     Flaw exists. -Remedy: hnplement assurance techniques to reduce the likelihood of a
          flaw.

    -     Flaw is exploitable. -Remedy: Apply layered protections and architectural designs to
          prevent exploitability.

    -     Attacker's cost is less than gain -Remedy: Apply protections to increase attacker's cost
          (note that non-technical choices such as limiting what is processed can significantly
          reduce attacker's gain)

   -      Loss is too great. -Remedy: Apply design principles, architectural designs, and technical
          protections to limit extent of attack, thereby reducing loss. (Again, note that non-technical
          choices such as limiting what is processed may provide the most effective risk
          mitigation.)


Figure 5-2 shows how risk mitigation is applied for risks arising fi-om system errors and from
user actions not intended to violate security policy. For these situations the mitigation of risk is
very similar:

   -      Flaw exists. -Remedy: Implement assurance techniques to reduce the likelihood of a
          flaw.

   -      Flaw is exploitable. -Remedy: Apply layered protections and architectural designs to
          prevent exploitability.

   -      Since the security breach is not the result of an explicit decision, there is no consideration
          of cost to an attacker.

   -      Loss is too great. - Remedy: Apply design principles, architectural designs, and technical
          protections to limit the extent of a security breach, thereby reducing loss.




                                                        Loss
                                                   y Anticipated ^YES    (UNacceptable I
                                                   >^ Threshold^              Risk
                                                                                      J
                                                    \
                                                        I'
                                                  ^Risl^ccept^



                         Figure 5-2 Basics of Risk Mitigation - Errors/Mistakes




SP 800-33                                        Page 19                                   December 2001
6.0 Definitions


TERM                                                     DEFINITION

access control       Enable authorized use of a resource while preventing unauthorized use or use in an
                     unauthorized manner.


accountability       The security objective that generates the requirement for actions of an entity to be
                     traced uniquely to that entity. This supports non-repudiation, deterrence, fault
                     isolation, intrusion detection and prevention, and after-action recovery and legal
                     action.


assurance            Grounds for confidence that the other four security objectives (integrity,
                     availability, confidentiality, and accountability) have been adequately met by a
                     specific implementation. "Adequately met" includes (1) functionality that performs
                     correctly, (2) sufficient protection against unintentional errors (by users or
                     software), and (3) sufficient resistance to intentional penetration or by-pass.


authentication       Verifying the identity of a user, process, or device, often as a prerequisite to
                     allowing access to resources in a system.


authorization        The granting or denying of access rights to a user, program, or process.

availability         The security objective that generates the requirement for protection against
                     intentional or accidental attempts to (1) perform unauthorized deletion of data or
                     (2) otherwise cause a denial of service or data.


confidentiality      The security objective that generates the requirement for protection from
                     intentional or accidental attempts to perform unauthorized data reads.
                     Confidentiality covers data in storage, during processing, and while in transit.


computing security   Computing security methods are security safeguards implemented within the IT,
methods              using the networking, hardware, software, and firmware of the IT. This includes
                     (1) the hardware, firmware, and software that implements security ftmctionality
                     and (2) the design, implementation, and verification techniques used to ensure that
                     system assurance requirements are satisfied.


data integrity       The property that data has not been altered in an unauthorized manner. Data
                     integrity covers data in storage, during processing, and while in transit.


data origin          The verification that the source of data received is as claimed.
authentication


denial of service    The prevention of authorized access to resources or the delaying of time-critical
                     operations.


domain               See "security domain."


entity               Either a subject (an active element that operates on information or the system state)
                     or an object (a passive element that contains or receives information).




SP 800-33                                      Page 20                                     December 2001
integrity                 The security objective that generates the requirement for protection against either
                          intentional or accidental attempts to violate data integrity (the property that data
                          has not been altered in an unauthorized manner) or system integrity (the quality
                          that a system has when it performs its intended function in an unimpaired manner,
                          free from unauthorized manipulation).


identity                  Information that is unique within a security domain and which is recognized as
                          denoting a particular entity within that domain.


identity-based security   A security policy based on the identities and/or atfributes of the object (system
policy                    resource) being accessed and of the subject (user, group of users, process, or
                          device) requesting access.


IT-related risk           The net mission/business impact (probability of occurrence combined with impact)
                          from a particular threat source exploiting, or triggering, a particular information
                          technology vulnerability. IT related-risks arise from legal liability or
                          mission/business loss due to:

                          1   .   Unauthorized (malicious, non-malicious, or accidental) disclosure,
                                  modification, or destruction of information.
                          2.      Non-malicious errors and omissions.
                          3.      IT disruptions due to natural or man-made disasters.
                          4.      Failure to exercise due care and diligence in the implementation and operation
                                  of the IT.


IT Security               A description of security principles and an overall approach for complying with the
Architecture              principles that drive the system design; i.e., guidelines on the placement and
                          implementation of specific security services within various disfributed computing
                          environments.


IT security objective     See "security objectives."


non-computing             Non-computing methods are security safeguards which do not use the hardware,
security methods          software, and firmware of the IT. Non-computing methods include physical
                          security (controlling physical access to computing resources), personnel security,
                          and procedural security.


object                    A passive entity that contains or receives information. Note that access to an object
                          potentially implies access to the information it contains.


reference monitor         The security engineering term for IT functionality that (1) controls all access, (2)
                          cannot be by-passed, (3) is tamper-resistant, and (4) provides confidence that the
                          other three items are frue.


residual risk             The remaining, potential risk after all IT security measures are applied. There is a
                          residual risk associated with each threat.


risk                      Within this document, synonymous with "IT-related risk."




SP 800-33                                              Page 21                                  December 2001
risk analysis         The process of identifying the risks to system security and determining the
                      probability of occurrence, the resulting impact, and the additional safeguards that
                      mitigate this impact. Part of risk management and synonymous with risk
                      assessment.


risk assessment       See "risk analysis."


risk management       The total process of identifying, controlling, and mitigating information technology
                      related risks. It includes risk analysis; cost-benefit analysis; and the selection,
                      implementation, test, and security evaluation of safeguards. This overall system
                      security review considers both effectiveness and efficiency, including impact on
                      the mission/business and constraints due to policy, regulations, and laws.


rule-based security   A security policy based on global rules imposed for all subjects. These rules
policy                usually rely on a comparison of the sensitivity of the objects being accessed and
                      the possession of corresponding attributes by the subjects requesting access.


security              Security is a system property. Security is much more than a set of functions and
                      mechanisms. Information technology security is a system characteristic as well as a
                      set of mechanisms which span the system both logically and physically.



security domain       A set of subjects, their information objects, and a common security policy.

security goal         The IT security goal is to enable an organization to meet all mission/business
                      objectives by implementing systems with due care consideration of IT-related risks
                      to the organization, its partners, and its customers.


security policy       The statement of required protection of the information objects.

security objectives   The five security objectives are integrity, availability, confidentiality,
                      accountability, and assurance.


subject               An active entity, generally in the form of a person, process, or device, that causes
                      information to flow among objects or changes the system state.


system integrity      The quality that a system has when it performs its intended function in an
                      unimpaired manner, free from unauthorized manipulation of the system, whether
                      intentional or accidental.


threat                The potential for a "threat source" (defined below) to exploit (intentional) or
                      trigger (accidental) a specific vulnerability.


threat source         Either (1) intent and method targeted at the intentional exploitation of a
                      vulnerability or (2) the situation and method that may accidentally trigger a
                      vulnerability.


threat analysis       The examination of threat sources against system vulnerabilities to determine the
                      threats for a particular system in a particular operational environment.


traffic analysis      The inference of information fi-om observation of traffic flows (presence, absence,
                      amount, direction, and fi-equency).



SP 800-33                                          Page 22                                   December 2001
traffic flow      A confidentiality service to protect against traffic analysis.
confidentiality


vulnerability     A weakness in system security procedures, design, implementation, internal
                  controls, etc., that could be accidentally triggered or intentionally exploited and
                  result in a violation of the system's security policy.




SP 800-33                                   Page 23                                    December 2001
                                       APPENDIX A: References

1 .              ;       Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation (CC),
      Version 2.1, August 1999.

2.    Stonebumer, Gary; Developing a Commercial Security Architecture, tutorial presented at the
      11* Computer Security Applications Conference, New Orleans, LA, December 1995.

3.                   ;
                         Open Systems Interconnect Reference Model, ISO 7498, Organization for
      International Standardization (ISO).

4.    Shipman, Stephen; Mr. Shipman's Network Primer, Chapter 1 "The OSI Model,"
      http://personal.hartfordschools.org/~stephen/library/network_primer/ch01.html




SP 800-33                                          Page 24                              December 2001
                                  Technical Publications
Periodical

                                                                                        —
Journal of Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Reports NIST research
and development in metrology and related fields of physical science, engineering, applied mathematics,
statistics, biotechnology, and information technology. Papers cover a broad range of subjects, v^ith major

emphasis on measurement methodology and the basic technology underlying standardization. Also included
from time to time are survey articles on topics closely related to the Institute's technical and scientific
programs. Issued six times a year.



Nonperiodicals

Monographs   —Major contributions      technical
                                        to the            on various subjects
                                                         literature                         related to the
                   and technical
Institute's scientific                activities.

Handbooks—Recommended codes of engineering and                practice (including
                                                              industrial                 codes)safety         devel-
oped  incooperation with                   professional organizations, and regulatory bodies.
                          interested industries,

Special Publications—Include proceedings of conferences sponsored by NIST, NIST annual                  reports, and
other special publications appropriate to this grouping such as wall charts, pocket cards, and bibliographies.

                                                    —
National Standard Reference Data Series Provides quantitative data on the physical and chemical
properties of materials, compiled from the world's literature and critically evaluated. Developed under a
worldwide program coordinated by NIST under the authority of the National Standard Data Act (Public
Law 90-396). NOTE: The Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data (JPCRD) is published
bimonthly for NIST by the American Institute of Physics (AIP). Subscription orders and renewals are
available from AIP, RO. Box 503284, St. Louis,          MO
                                                      63150-3284.
                         —
Building Science Series Disseminates technical information developed at the Institute on building
materials, components, systems, and whole structures. The series presents research results, test methods, and
performance criteria related to the structural and environmental functions and the durability and safety
characteristics of building elements and systems.

                  —
Technical Notes Studies or reports which are complete in themselves but restrictive in their treatment of
a subject. Analogous to monographs but not so comprehensive in scope or definitive in treatment of the
subject area. Often serve as a vehicle for final reports of work performed at NIST under the sponsorship of
other government agencies.
                                  —
Voluntary Product Standards ^Developed under procedures published by the Department of Commerce
in Part 10, Title 15, of the Code of Federal Regulations. The standards establish nationally recognized
requirements for products, and provide all concerned interests with a basis for common understanding of
the characteristics of the products. NIST administers this program in support of the efforts of private-sector
standardizing organizations.

Order the following NIST publications      —FIPS and NISTIRs—from the National Technical Information
Service, Springfield, VA 22161.
Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUB)               —   ^Publications in this series
collectively constitute the Federal Information Processing Standards Register. The Register serves as the
official source of information in the Federal Goverrmient regarding standards issued by NIST pursuant to
the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended. Public Law 89-306 (79 Stat.
1127), and as implemented by Executive Order 11717 (38 FR 12315, dated May 11, 1973) and Part 6 of
Tide 15 CFR (Code of Federal Regulations).
NIST Interagency or Internal Reports (NIS'llK)
                                                         —   ^The series includes interim or final reports on work
performed by NIST for outside sponsors (both government and nongovernment). In general, initial
distribution is handled by the sponsor, public distribution is handled by sales through the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, Nk 22161, in hard copy, electronic media, or microfiche form. NISTIR's
may also report results of NIST projects of transitory or limited interest, including those that will be
published subsequently in more comprehensive form.
<u
E
E a
o T3             OS
U C              o\
                 00
O on             o

                      10   u
*-> .t;     eo    ,   c >
fc«   it;   o    60
