     2022
Cybersecurity &
    Privacy
 Annual Report




            NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 800-225
                                                           NIST Special Publication
                                                                  NIST SP 800-225


  Fiscal Year 2022 Cybersecurity and
               Privacy Annual Report

            Patrick O’Reilly, Editor
        Computer Security Division
                                                                                  Co-Editors:
Information Technology Laboratory
                                                                               Larry Feldman
                                                                                   Greg Witte
       Kristina Rigopoulos, Editor                                Huntington Ingalls Industries
     Applied Cybersecurity Division
Information Technology Laboratory




                                              This publication is available free of charge from:
                                                    https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-225

                                                                                              May 2023




                                                                          U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
                                                                                 Gina M. Raimondo, Secretary

                                                    NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
               Laurie E. Locascio, NIST Director and Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology
                       Foreword       5
                 Priority Areas

 Table             Cryptography       7
   of         Education, Training
                    & Workforce       9
Contents
                   Development
                Identity & Access
                    Management   11
                         Privacy 13


                    Measurement 15
              Risk Management &

                    Trustworthy
                     Networks &
                      Platforms
                                     17
                         Usable
                   Cybersecurity     19
                 NCCoE Summary     21
           Opportunities to Engage 22


                                    PAGE 3
Foreword




           PAGE 4
                FOREWORD

Nelson Mandela famously said, “Remember to celebrate             How did we celebrate
milestones as you prepare for the road ahead.”                   our 50th anniversary
This year, we celebrated a major milestone that we’re proud
of: 50 years of cybersecurity at NIST. Over the last five
                                                                 of cybersecurity this
decades, we have conducted research and developed                       year?
guidance that has led to extraordinary advancements in
cybersecurity.
                                                                 • We launched a new NIST
Many of these advancements have taken on new life over
                                                                 Cybersecurity Program
the years as the world of cybersecurity shifts and adjusts.
We look forward to outlining our accomplishments each            History and Timeline tool,
year in these Annual Reports as we share how our dynamic         which provides an
projects help advance technology, cybersecurity and privacy
                                                                 overview of NIST’s major
standards and guidelines, and measurement science for all.
                                                                 cybersecurity research
You’ll notice that this year’s Annual Report has a new look
and feel. We are debuting a simpler format with less text
                                                                 projects, programs, and –
and more pointers to our helpful and robust websites, and        ultimately – history.
we organized the publication into seven key categories
(see our table of contents for a list, and read about each one
throughout this report).                                         • We set up a dedicated
This past year, NIST conducted research and demonstrated         anniversary website that
practical applications in several key priority areas,            has everything in one
including Post Quantum Cryptography (and the selection of        place – blog posts, event
PQC algorithms for standardization); an update to the NIST
Cybersecurity Framework (CSF 2.0), including new CSF
                                                                 details, and resources.
profiles; software and supply chain cybersecurity; our
Internet of Things (IoT) cybersecurity guidelines work;
                                                                 • We shared and
launching a new comment site for our security and privacy
controls and baselines (so we can get our resources into the     collaborated on our
hands of practitioners faster and improve the user               cybersecurity Twitter
experience for our customers); and much more.                    account using the hashtag
We are always learning, growing, and creating, so sometimes      #NISTcyber50th all year.
we forget to take a minute to reflect. This year, we enjoyed
doing just that as we celebrated the very milestones that
make us unique.


         - Kevin Stine, NIST Chief Cybersecurity Advisor



                                                                                      PAGE 5
Cryptography




               PAGE 6
                            CRYPTOGRAPHY

Cryptography is foundational to our security and data protection needs. The standards,
guidelines, recommendations, and tools provided by NIST’s Cryptography priority area
enable trustworthy assurance of integrity and confidentiality in all types of information
                       and technology – now and in the future.

Major Accomplishments in FY 2022:
• The Post-Quantum Cryptography team announced the third-round selection and the
  fourth-round candidates. The call for additional signatures was released. Standards
  development on the selected algorithms is underway.
• The Lightweight Cryptography Project continued to evaluate the finalist algorithms
  to prepare for the final selection. The fifth Lightweight Cryptography Workshop was
  held.
• NIST’s Crypto Publication Review Board completed two reviews, and seven reviews
  are in progress to update and modernize the portfolio of cryptographic standards.
• NIST continued to explore multi-party threshold cryptography through workshops,
  calls for feedback on criteria for threshold schemes, and other industry
  collaboration.
                                                     Learn more about this priority area




                                                                                    NIST is proud
                                                                               to have achieved
                                                                               the milestone of
                                                                               selecting the
                                                                               algorithms which
                                                                               will help protect
                                                                               our sensitive data
                                                                               against the
                                                                               possibility of
                                                                               future attacks
                                                                               from quantum
                                                                               computers.

                                                                                 - Dustin Moody,
                                                                                NIST PQC Project
                                                                                           Lead
                                                  Image credit: Shutterstock

                                                                                          PAGE 7
Education,
Training &
Workforce




             PAGE 8
           EDUCATION, TRAINING & WORKFORCE

    Energizing, promoting, and coordinating the workforce are key priorities for NIST.
      The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) supports a robust
   community that works together to advance an integrated ecosystem of cybersecurity
                    education, training, and workforce development.

Major Accomplishments in FY 2022:
• NICE released the National K12 Cybersecurity Education Roadmap with five major elements
  and accompanying strategies.
• The NICE Community Coordinating Council launched five project teams that each support
  objectives from the NICE Strategic Plan.
• NICE launched the Cybersecurity Apprenticeship Finder and supported a 120-Day
  Cybersecurity Apprenticeship Sprint in partnership with the U.S. Department of Labor.
• A report, “Measuring Cybersecurity Workforce Capabilities: Defining a Proficiency Scale
  for the NICE Framework”, was submitted to Congress.
• In response to the FY 2021 National Defense Authorization Act, NICE submitted a report to
  Congress on cybersecurity proficiencies and published cybersecurity career pathways
  information.
• The Small Business Cybersecurity Corner released a series of videos with companion
  discussion guides on ransomware, phishing, and multi-factor authentication.
• NIST continued to bring together the community through events, including the Federal
  Cybersecurity Workforce Summit and Webinars, Federal Information Security Educators
  (FISSEA) Forums, NICE Webinar Series, Cybersecurity Career Awareness Week, and by
  supporting the NICE Conference, NICE K12 Conference, and US Cyber
  Games through cooperative agreements.
                                                    Learn more about these priority areas




              As cybersecurity risks evolve, the need for a knowledgeable and skilled
              cybersecurity workforce remains constant.
                                                       - Rodney Petersen, Director of NICE at NIST
                                                         Image credit: Florida International University
                                                                                                          PAGE 9
  Identity &
     Access
Management




               PAGE 10
             IDENTITY & ACCESS MANAGEMENT

Identity and Access Management (IAM) is the cornerstone of data protection, privacy,
and security. NIST’s IAM priority area provides the research, guidance, and technology
transition activities to help ensure that the right humans, devices, data, and processes
              have the right access to the right resources at the right time.

Major Accomplishments in FY 2022:
• A third revision of the Personal Identity Verification of Federal Employees standard was
  published, which specifies secure and reliable forms of identity credentials for federal
  employees and contractors who need access to federal facilities and applications.
• The draft of NIST’s Digital Identity Guidelines was completed, incorporating comments
  submitted in response to the June 2020 Request for Comments (RFC), lessons learned from
  federal agencies and industry, and new content about emerging technologies, threats, and
  policies.
• Part 8 of the Face Recognition Vendor Test (FRVT) was published. This report compiles and
  analyzes demographic summary measures for how face recognition false positive and false
  negative error rates differ across age, sex, and race-based demographic groups. This is a
  key step toward a metric that can be used to summarize demographic differentials, support
  standards development for measuring performance, and drive improvements in the
  technology.
• Guidance was provided for the implementation of DevSecOps primitives for reference
  platforms that host cloud-native applications with the publication of Application of
  DevSecOps Using a Service Mesh in Microservices-Based Infrastructure.
• NIST contributed to and helped finalize the international standard for Mobile Driving
  License (mDL) Applications, developed a reference implementation to test the standard,
  and created security and privacy considerations for the mDL ecosystem.
                                                       Learn more about this priority area
              Image credit: Shutterstock



                                           NIST’s Identity & Access Management Program is a
                                           cornerstone for government services. From Zero Trust
                                           to benefits distribution, some of the most critical
                                           aspects of government rely on our research and
                                           guidance….

                                                - Ryan Galluzzo, NIST Digital Identity Program Lead



                                                                                          PAGE 11
Privacy




          PAGE 12
                                         PRIVACY
   Privacy is integral to the trust that supports the growth of the digital economy and
    improves our quality of life. NIST has prioritized Privacy Engineering to support
   measurement science and system engineering principles through frameworks, risk
               models, and guidance that protect privacy and civil liberties.


Major Accomplishments in FY 2022:
• Numerous Privacy Framework resources were released, including Spanish and Portuguese
  translations of the Privacy Framework Quick Start Guide and a webinar on using regulatory
  crosswalks for Framework implementation.
• NIST’s differential privacy blog series was completed, and in-depth differential privacy
  guidelines are in development (a draft for public comment is anticipated in FY 2023).
• The NIST Privacy Workforce Public Working Group (PWWG) was launched, which now has
  800+ members from across the globe. Project teams are currently working on defining tasks,
  knowledge, and skills aligned with the Privacy Framework and the NICE Framework to
  support the growth of a workforce capable of managing privacy risks.​ Two of an anticipated
  ten PWWG project teams have completed their work, and three additional have launched.
• Co-sponsored by NIST, the U.S. partnered with the U.K.’s Center for Data Ethics and
  Innovation to launch a Privacy-Enhancing Technologies Prize Challenge to advance privacy-
  preserving federated learning.
• The Privacy Engineering Program continues to collaborate across NIST programs and
  priority areas. NIST also leads external efforts to advance privacy, including co-chairing
  Privacy Research & Development and Privacy-Preserving Data Sharing and Analytics
  Interagency Working Groups.

                                                            Learn more about this priority area

                                                            "The NIST Privacy Framework,
                                                            published in January 2020, is quickly
                                                            becoming the mainstream control set
                                                            for organizations to align with when
                                                            assessing their data privacy posture,
                                                            developing readiness roadmaps, and
                                                            maturing their privacy program.“

                                                            -JD Supra, LLC

                               Image credit: Shutterstock

                                                                                           PAGE 13
        Risk
Management &
Measurement




               PAGE 14
         RISK MANAGEMENT AND MEASUREMENT

         Organizations must balance a rapidly evolving cybersecurity and privacy
 threat landscape with the need to fulfill enterprise mission and business requirements.
  This evolution increasingly calls for a collaborative approach to managing discipline-
    specific enterprise risks. Risk management is integrated into NIST standards and
    guidelines to help better understand, measure, manage, and reduce cybersecurity
                            and privacy risk in a larger context.

Major Accomplishments in FY 2022:
• NIST kicked off the Journey to CSF 2.0 with a Request for Information (RFI), a summary
  analysis document of the RFI responses, and a workshop with 3,900+ attendees from 100
  countries. More planning is now underway for additional workshops and drafts.
• Updated guidance on assessing security and privacy controls was released, featuring updated
  assessment procedures to better enable automation.
• Guidance on managing cybersecurity risk in supply chains for all levels of an organization
  was released with specific sections focused on securing software supply chains. Additionally,
  NIST collaborated with software developers, service providers, and users to develop secure
  software development guidance that is now mandatory for federal agency software
  acquisition and use.
• New guidance and example implementations were developed and released to demonstrate
  how organizations can verify that the internal components of their computing devices are
  genuine and have not been tampered with.
                                                             Learn more about this priority area




                                                                               Image credit: Shutterstock

           With our increasing dependence on computing technology and the rapid emergence
           of cyber-physical systems – from medical devices to automobiles to the electric grid –
           managing cybersecurity and privacy risk is an essential component in the safe and
           effective use of those systems. We are committed to our stakeholder-driven,
           collaborative, and thorough approach.
                                                                          - Ron Ross, NIST Fellow

                                                                                                PAGE 15
Trustworthy
Networks &
Platforms




          PAGE 16
                     TRUSTWORTHY NETWORKS
                         AND PLATFORMS

  Each of us relies on the hardware, software, and networks that form the fabric of our
  digital ecosystems. NIST’s Trustworthy Networks and Trustworthy Platforms priority
    areas support research and practical implementation guidance to ensure secure,
                reliable, and resilient technology across industry sectors.

Major Accomplishments in FY 2022:
• NIST published guidance to enhance and strengthen the security and integrity of the
  software supply chain in support of Executive Order (EO)14028. This effort included
  cybersecurity supply chain risk management practices and guidelines for software
  developer verification, systems security engineering, and secure software development.
• Hardware security mechanisms and governance safeguards guidance was finalized to
  measure and attest to the integrity of the platform in an infrastructure-as-a-service (IaaS)
  cloud deployment model and other multi-tenant cloud environments.
• The development of the Cybersecurity for IoT program has progressed through stakeholder
  engagement, guidance for consumers of IoT products and federal agencies, and practical
  guidance for securing industrial internet of things (IIoT) devices (e.g., distributed energy
  resources).
               Learn more about the Trustworthy Networks and Platforms priority areas




            Leverage measurement science, guidelines, and standards to foster the adoption of
            innovative and trustworthy information and communication technology.
                                                - Murugiah Souppaya, NIST Computer Scientist
                                                                               Image credit: Shutterstock
                                                                                             PAGE 17
      Usable
Cybersecurity




                PAGE 18
                       USABLE CYBERSECURITY


 The mission of the Usable Cybersecurity priority area is to “champion the human in
 cybersecurity.” Through human-centered research and projects, the usability team
   seeks to better understand and improve users’ cybersecurity interactions and
       empower people to be active, informed participants in cybersecurity.

Major Accomplishments in FY 2022:
• NIST received a provisional patent for the Phish Scale – a method to help organizations
  contextualize phishing training click rates. The scale was further expanded based on real-
  world data and feedback from the growing number of organizations that have adopted the
  Phish Scale.
• A parent-child study examining youths’ cybersecurity and privacy perceptions,
  knowledge, and behaviors found that conversations with parents were key to youth
  gaining solid understandings regarding the topics. Results were shared in research and
  government forums.
• A research study identified the approaches and challenges of U.S. Government
  cybersecurity awareness programs − including emphasis on compliance rather than
  impact − and informed new government awareness and training guidelines.
• Survey findings on consumer perceptions and experiences with updates for smart home
  devices revealed a lack of transparency and user misconceptions. Results informed
  Internet of Things cybersecurity guidelines and labeling efforts.
                                                      Learn more about this priority area




          We amplify the voices and
          needs of people within a
          field that is most often
          viewed through a
          technology-dominant lens.

          - Julie Haney, NIST Usable
          Cybersecurity Program Lead



                                                                          Image credit: Shutterstock

                                                                                      PAGE 19
National
Cybersecurity
Center of
Excellence
(NCCoE)
Summary




          PAGE 20
     SUMMARY OF THE NCCOE

      The NCCoE brings together members of industry, government, and
    academia to address the real-world needs of securing complex systems
             and protecting the Nation’s critical infrastructure.



• Happy Birthday, National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE)!
  NCCoE celebrated its 10-year anniversary in FY 2022. The NCCoE was established in
  2012 through a partnership among NIST, the State of Maryland, and Montgomery
  County, MD.
• Practical, standards-based guidance. The NCCoE published 33 publications in FY
  2022 on topics ranging from enterprise patch management, trusted cloud, securing
  telehealth, zero trust, mobile device security, supply chain integrity, and much more.
  View our full list of publications here.
• Exploring new areas. We launched new projects in the areas of hybrid satellite
  networks, identity, telehealth smart home integration, post-quantum cryptography,
  cybersecurity of genomic data, artificial intelligence, and software supply chain, to
  name a few.
• New look, same great information. We launched a redesigned NCCoE website to
  improve the user experience.

• Take a virtual look inside
  the NCCoE labs. We
  developed a virtual lab
  tour series. Explore the
  work being done in each
  lab, meet our subject-
  matter experts, and learn
  what sector or technology
  challenges our projects are
  addressing here.



                                                                                 PAGE 21
        OPPORTUNITIES TO ENGAGE WITH NIST
           ON CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY

Collaborators and researchers are the driving force behind NIST’s programs. NIST
depends on developers, providers, and everyday users of cybersecurity and privacy
technologies and information to guide our priorities.
• Details on engaging with NIST on cybersecurity and privacy are available here.
• Many NIST projects are supported by guest researchers, both foreign and domestic.
• The Pathways Program supports federal internships for students and recent graduates.
• NIST funds industrial and academic research in several ways:
  • The Small Business Innovation Research Program (SBIR) funds research and
    development proposals.
  • NIST offers grants to encourage work in the fields of precision measurement, fire
    research, and materials science. For general information on NIST’s grant programs, please
    contact Mr. Christopher Hunton via grants@nist.gov.
• The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) Speakers Bureau enables engagement with
  universities and colleges to raise student and faculty awareness about the exciting work
  going on at NIST and motivate them to consider pursuing opportunities to work with ITL.
• More information about our research, projects, publications, and events can be found on
  the NIST Computer Security Resource Center (CSRC) website.

                                                                                   Image credit: Canva




                                                                                    PAGE 22
Authority
This publication has been developed by NIST in accordance with its statutory
responsibilities under the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of
2014, 44 U.S.C. § 3551 et seq., Public Law (P.L.) 113-283. NIST is responsible for developing
information security standards and guidelines, including minimum requirements for
federal information systems, but such standards and guidelines shall not apply to national
security systems without the express approval of appropriate federal officials exercising
policy authority over such systems. This guideline is consistent with the requirements of
the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130.

Nothing in this publication should be taken to contradict the standards and guidelines
made mandatory and binding on federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under
statutory authority. Nor should these guidelines be interpreted as altering or superseding
the existing authorities of the Secretary of Commerce, Director of the OMB, or any other
federal official. This publication may be used by nongovernmental organizations on a
voluntary basis and is not subject to copyright in the United States. Attribution would,
however, be appreciated by NIST.

How to Cite this NIST Technical Series Publication
O'Reilly PD, II, Rigopoulos KG, Feldman L, Witte GA (2023) Fiscal Year 2022 Cybersecurity
and Privacy Annual Report. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg,
MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-225. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-
225.

Disclaimer
Any mention of commercial products or organizations is for informational purposes only; it
is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of
Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the products identified are
necessarily the best available for the purpose.

Acknowledgments
The editors would like to thank their NIST colleagues by extending special recognition and
appreciation for Victoria Yan Pillitteri, Isabel Van Wyk, Jeffrey Marron, Matthew Scholl,
Kevin Stine, Sara Kerman, Sheryl Taylor, and Jim Foti for reviewing and providing valuable
feedback, writing input, and administrative support for this Annual Report.

Trademark Information
All names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners.


                                                                                    PAGE 23
Abstract
During Fiscal Year 2022 (FY 2022) – from October 1, 2021, through September 30, 2022 –
the NIST Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) Cybersecurity and Privacy Program
successfully responded to numerous challenges and opportunities in security and privacy.
This Annual Report highlights the FY 2022 research activities for the ITL Cybersecurity and
Privacy Program, including: the ongoing participation and development of international
standards; research and practical applications in several key priority areas (e.g., Post
Quantum Cryptography, updating the NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF 2.0) and some
new CSF profiles); accomplishments in the area of improving software and supply chain
cybersecurity; IoT cybersecurity guidelines work; National Cybersecurity Center of
Excellence (NCCoE) projects, and setting up a new comment site for NIST’s Risk
Management Framework work. NIST also celebrated a 50th anniversary in cybersecurity
and the NCCoE celebrated a 10-year anniversary since inception.

Keywords
annual report; cybersecurity; cybersecurity program; Federal Information Security
Management Act; FISMA; privacy; program highlights; information security; Information
Technology Laboratory; ITL; program accomplishments.

Reports on Computer Systems Technology
The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical
leadership for the Nation’s measurement and standards infrastructure. ITL develops tests,
test methods, reference data, proof of concept implementations, and technical analyses to
advance the development and productive use of information technology. ITL’s
responsibilities include the development of management, administrative, technical, and
physical standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of other than
national security-related information in federal information systems. The Special
Publication 800-series reports on ITL’s research, guidelines, and outreach efforts in
information system security, and its collaborative activities with industry, government, and
academic organizations.




                                                                                    PAGE 24
