                       Archived NIST Technical Series Publication
The attached publication has been archived (withdrawn), and is provided solely for historical purposes.
It may have been superseded by another publication (indicated below).

Archived Publication
Series/Number:             NIST Special Publication 800-4
Title:                     Computer Security Considerations in Federal Procurements: A Guide for
                           Procurement Initiatiors, Contracting Officers, and Computer Security
Publication Date(s):       March 1992
Withdrawal Date:           October 2003
Withdrawal Note:
                           SP 800-4 is superseded in its entirety by the publication of
                           SP 800-64 (October 2003).


Superseding Publication(s)
The attached publication has been superseded by the following publication(s):

Series/Number:           NIST Special Publication 800-64
Title:
                         Security Considerations in the System Development Life Cycle

Author(s):
                         Tim Grance, Joan Hash, Marc Stevens

Publication Date(s):     October 2003
URL/DOI:                 http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-64

Additional Information (if applicable)
Contact:                 Computer Security Division (Information Technology Lab)
Latest revision of the
                         SP 800-64 Rev. 2 (as of August 12, 2015)
attached publication:
Related information:
                         http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SMA/sdlc/

Withdrawal
                         N/A
announcement (link):




Date updated: ƵŐƵƐƚϭϮ, 2015
                   NIST Special Publication 800-4       Computer Security
                   U.S.     DEPARTMENT OF               Considerations in
                   COMMERCE
                   Technology Administration
                                                        Federal Procurements:
                   National Institute of Standards
                   and Technology
                                                        A Guide for Procurement Initiators,
                                                        Contracting Officers, and
        NAT L INST. OF STAND 4 TECH R.I.C.              Computer Security Officials


                           7bDbO c                      Barbara Guttman
    A 11 ID 3                                i




        NIST
PUBLICATIONS



                                COMPUTER SECURITY




100
U57
800-4
1992
r   ?
                                                     Nisr
                                                                              63c too
nist special Publication soo-4   Computer Security
                                 Considerations in
                                 Federal Procurements:
                                 A Guide for Procurement Initiators, c
                                 Contracting Officers, and
                                 Computer Security Officials

                                 Barbara Guttman




    COMPUTER                        SECURITY
                                 Computer Systems Laboratory

                                 National Institute of Standards
                                 and Technology
                                 Gaithersburg,     MD 20899




                                 March 1992




                                               *
                                    **res o*




                                 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF           COMMERCE
                                 Barbara Hackman Franklin, Secretary
                                 Technology Administration
                                 Robert M. White, Under Secretary for Technology
                                 National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                 John W. Lyons, Director
                         Reports on Computer Systems Technology

  The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has a unique responsibility for computer
systems technology within the Federal Government. NIST's Computer Systems Laboratory (CSL) devel-
ops standards and guidelines, provides technical assistance, and conducts research for computers and
related telecommunications systems to achieve more effective utilization of Federal information technol-
ogy resources. CSL's responsibilities include development of technical, management, physical, and ad-
ministrative standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive unclassified
information processed in Federal computers. CSL assists agencies in developing security plans and in
improving computer security awareness training. This Special Publication 800 series reports CSL re-
search and guidelines to Federal agencies as well as to organizations in industry, government, and
academia.




     National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-4
        Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 800-4, 112 pages (Mar. 1992)
                                          CODEN: NSPUE2




                            U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                       WASHINGTON: 1992

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402
                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Computer Security Act of 1987 (Pub. L. 100-235) and Office of Management
and Budget Circular A- 130 mandate that U.S. Government agencies protect
automated information and the resources used to process it (hardware, firmware, and
software).    OMB Circular A- 130 specifically mandates that, as a part of protecting
computer systems, agencies incorporate computer security in the system acquisition
process.     This NIST Special Publication provides guidance for federal procurement
initiators, contracting officers,   and computer security officials on including computer
security in acquisitions.


To accomplish this goal, computer security and federal information processing (FIP)
procurement must be integrated. Computer security is the protection of the integrity,
availability and confidentiality of automated information and the resources used to
enter, store, process, and communicate the information.   Computer security shares
properties with systems/software engineering including trustworthiness, system safety,
and reliability.FIP procurement is the process of acquiring hardware, software,
firmware, computer-related services and telecommunications. FIP procurement
begins with the process of determining needs and ends with contract completion.


The integration of computer security and FIP procurement will result in
improvements in:

       meeting agency missions;
       protecting federal assets; and
       protecting individual rights.


The integration is accomplished by incorporating computer security into all phases of
the procurement cycle:      planning, solicitation, source selection, and contract
administration and closeout.


This guideline is based on the collective experience of government and industry
personnel from the fields of computer security, procurement, and information
resources management and is intended to be used in conjunction with agency or
General Services Administration guidance on procurement and computer security.
This guideline neither addresses nor supersedes requirements for the protection of
national security information resources.


NIST has prepared a related document that addresses the area of computer security
and procurement, Sample Statements of Work for Federal Computer Security
Services,   which provides assistance to agencies that are contracting for computer
security services, such as performing a risk analysis.



                                              iii
                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS


Executive Summary

Preface


Working Group Participants & Contributors

I.    Introduction                                            1

      A.      Requirement                                     1
      B.      Scope                                           1

      C.      Target Audience                                 2
      D.      Terminology                                     2

II.   Background                                              5
      A.    Computer Security                                 5
            A.l.  Basic Computer Security Concepts            5
            A. 2. Basic Computer Security Practices          10
      B.    FIP Procurement                                  11
            B. l. Basic Procurement Concepts                 12
            B.2.  Basic FIP Procurement Practices            13
            B.3.  Procurement Cycle from the Procurement
                     Initiator's Point of View               15

EQ.   Incorporating Computer Security into the Procurement
      Cycle                                                  19
      A.      Participants                                   19
      B.      Computer Security in the Procurement Cycle     20
              B.l.   Planning                                20
                     B.l. a.   Needs Determination           21
                     B.l.b. Requirements Analysis            22
                     B.l.c. Other Planning    Components     27
              B.2.   Solicitation                            28
                     B.2.a. Specifications   and Work        29
                     B.2.b. Evaluation                       30
                     B.2.c. Special Contract Requirements    32
              B.3.   Source Selection                        33
              B.4.   Administration and Closeout             33
IV.   Specifications, Clauses, Tasks, and Deliverables                    37

      A.    General Computer Security                                     39
      B.    Control of Hardware and Software                              40
      C.    Control of Information/Data                                   46
      D.    Security Documentation                                        48
      E.    Legal Issues                                                  51
      F.    Administration, End of Task, Closeout                         54
      G.    Computer Security Training and Awareness                      57
      H.    Personnel Security                                            59
      I.    Physical Security                                             62
      J.    Computer Security Features in Systems                         63
            J.l.     Identification and Authentication
                     Specifications                                       64
            J. 2.    Discretionary Access Control Specifications          65
            J.3.     Audit Specifications                                 65
            J.4.     Cryptography Specifications                          67
                     J.4.a. Encryption                                    68
                     J.4.b. Data Authentication                           68
                     J.4.C.   Electronic Signature                        69
                     J.4.d.   Key Management                              70
                     J.4.e.   Security of Cryptographic Modules           71
                     J.4.f.   Validations                                 72
            J. 5.    Object Reuse Specifications                          73
            J.6.     System Integrity Specifications                      73
            J. 7.    System Architecture Specifications                   73
            J.8.     Labels and Mandatory Access Control                  74
            J. 9.    Label Specifications                                 75
                     J.9.a. Label Integrity Specifications                75
                     J.9.b. Labels and Input/Output Specifications        76
                            J.9.b(l)      Multi-Label Communications      76
                              J.9.b(2)      Single-Label Communications   77
                              J.9.b(3)      Labeling Output               77
            J. 10.   Mandatory Access Control Specifications              78



                                         APPENDICES

Appendix A Table of Contents for Federal Government
                 Requests For Proposals (RFP)                             79

Appendix B Assurance                                                      83




                                              vi
Appendix C Planning Phase Risk Analysis                         91


Appendix D Glossary                                             95

Appendix E References                                           105




                                 LIST OF FIGURES

Figure   1   Threats, Safeguards, Vulnerabilities,   & Assets    7
Figure 2     Multidisciplinary Coordination                      9
Figure 3     RFP Sections                                       15
Figure 4     Procurement Cycle                                  17
Figure 5     Flow Model for Computer Security Components        26
Figure 6     Computer Security in the Procurement Cycle         35




                                           vii
                                       PREFACE

Computers and information play an increasingly important role in modern society.
More people use computers, more information is processed and stored by them, and
our nation's dependence on computers continues to grow.     Therefore,   it is   essential
to protect computers and the information they contain.


From a practical standpoint, computer viruses, white-collar crime, theft of hardware
and software, unauthorized access to data, and damage and destruction of computer
systems by people or nature are real threats. Computer security shows its worth in
preventing loss or harm. The meaning of terms like "appropriate and cost-effective
safeguards" are truly appreciated   when explaining how a loss was or was not
prevented.


Due to the vital need to protect computer systems, the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) provides standards and guidelines on many
aspects of computer security. This document addresses the specific issue of
including computer security requirements in federal information processing (FIP)
procurements.   A NIST-sponsored working group of government and industry
representatives in computer security, information management, and FIP procurement
helped to develop this document.




                                            ix
                             Working Group Participants and Contributors


1YU11CUU Rrnnnpr
RonslH   JJl U11UC1                   RnnalH (~i
                                      IwllalU \J      .
                                                          Rrnnnpr
                                                          1J1U1111C1 Mr A eer^idtpe
                                                                     OC .r\oolJvla.lCJ»
ItTq^p       i    nl\/Ai*             ociicid.1 ociviLci>          riuminisudiion
JL/UIllld.       J-VUUaUll            INcUlUllal IIIMUUIC Ul            OUWIUaJUS OC        1 CL-IlllUlUgy
Vircril      Oih<inn                  vji ui mi ia.il vjoxol      o j iMCiiia/ in dliuiia.1 ocwuilly   rtiiCllcy
Danipl VJ
IxiUIlvl Gamhpl
          Cll 1 1 l-'^'l              finimman Data SvstPiTK/Narinnal SJpniritv Acrptirv
"P
L-i.   T^vlrvr
       1 dylUl T anHnun
               Lu&llVll UUl           vji uiiiiiictii ucLva.      oyaiciiia
r^ot-olH Q Ti^cuig
vjci aiu o.   on(j                    iycpalrtmpnt
                                      T"»f*nn LlllClll r\f
                                                       Ul \7f*tf»r5>
                                                           VClClalla nc       Affaire
                                                                              /Al 1 all

Victor Marshall                       R007- Allpn                IJarniltnn/Natinrial Aprnnantire. Mr Snarf*
                                       A H m n s Ira ti o n
                                             i   i


                                      AN<sFR
                                      /Al> OJ_<lV

VJaiy Wla.ll                          -FCUCldl l_(lllClgCll^y IVlallagClllCIll r\UllllIllMlcUlUll
Nicholas Pantiuk                      Grumman Data Systems/National Security Agency
f^hinnit!!    PhillinQ
v. IllLjUllcl JTlllllljJo             vJCllCl u.1    JClvlCCo /AUllllIlldUallUIl
Carmen Santos-Logan                   Defense Logistics Agency
Philip Sibert                         Department of Energy
Edward Simpson                        Department of Energy
Ted I. Wells                          Patent     & Trademark Office
Stephen C. Willett                    U.S. Postal Service
John Zobel                            International Software Systems/Department of State




The Working Group gratefully acknowledges input from the following people:

Carol E. Bennett                      National Aeronautics               & Space Administration
Joan Bonk                             U.S. Senate
Leonard Clark                         National Aeronautics               & Space Administration
Lee Conyers                           Department of Transportation
Karen Deneroff                        InternalRevenue Service
Barbara Estrada                       Department of the Treasury
Irene Gilbert                         National Institute of Standards                     & Technology
Paul Lewis                            Department of Energy
Harris McGarrah                       U.S. Coast Guard
Michelle Moldenhauer                  Department of the Treasury
Noel Nazario                           National Institute of Standards                    & Technology
Bill O'Brian                          U.S. Navy
Mervyn Stuckey                         Bureau of the Census




                                                             X
                                     CHAPTER I
                                   INTRODUCTION

A.   REQUIREMENT
The need to provide protection for federal automated information assets has been
present since computers were first used. The Office of Management and Budget
(OMB) formally established a federal computer security policy in 1978 and updated
that policy in   OMB Circular A- 130, dated December 1985.   Congress passed several
laws relevant to computer security, including the Computer Security Act of 1987.
Both Congress and     OMBupdate and revise federal policies and regulations on
computer security. Computer security concepts and practices are discussed in
section ILA, Computer Security.


In order tomeet these policies and regulations, federal agencies must include
computer security considerations in all phases of information resources management.
OMB Circular A- 130 and the Federal Information Resources Management Regulation
(FIRMR) require security specifications for systems acquisitions.   In general,
including computer security in the acquisition phase results in less expensive and
better security than adding security to an operational system.   This document
provides guidance on including computer security considerations in the acquisition
phase of information resources management.



B.   SCOPE
This document is intended to help agencies select and acquire cost-effective
computer security by explaining how to include computer security requirements in
federal information processing (FIP) procurements.    The guideline has three parts.
The first part is an introduction to the two disciplines:

      computer security (targeted for FIP procurement personnel); and
      FIP procurement (targeted for computer security personnel).

These overviews provide sufficient knowledge to understand the legal, conceptual,
and regulatory underpinnings of the document. It should not be used as a sole
guide to computer security or FIP procurement.




                                            1
The second part explains the integration of computer security into the FIP
procurement process. The guideline recommends that the following analyses be
included in procurement documentation:


        sensitivity determination;
        analysis of integrity, availability, and confidentiality requirements;
        analysis of level of assurance required; and
        planning phase risk analysis.


The guideline also provides assistance on the selection of computer security features,
assurances, and procedures. The guideline clarifies:


        what sources of features, assurances, and procedures are required to be used
        by law or regulation; and
        what other sources are available and how to use them.

The third part of the document includes specifications and contract language for
specific   computer security features, assurances, and procedures that can be included
in   FIP procurements.

This document does not address the procurement of computer security-related
services, such as the development of risk analyses and contingency plans. NIST has
prepared a separate document, Special Publication 800-4, Sample Statements of Work
for Federal Computer Security Services, to address procurement of these services.

This document is not a substitute for agency procurement or security regulations,
policy, and guidance. It is intended to be used in conjunction with these agency
regulations.   This document does not address computer security requirements for
national security or Warner Amendment information resources.



C.    TARGET AUDIENCE
This document targets procurement initiators (the sponsor, program manager, or
person who will become the contracting officer's technical representative),
contracting officers, and computer security officials.



D.    TERMINOLOGY
The terms computer, computer system, automatic data processing (ADP), automatic
data processing equipment (ADPE), federal information processing (FIP) resource,
information technology support (ITS), information resources (IR), and automated



                                              2
information system (AIS) are used interchangeably throughout the government.   In
this document, the term FIP procurement is used because it is the term used in the
FIRMR, and the term computer security is used because it is the most common.
Both FIP procurement and computer security address the resources and services used
to enter, store, process, and transmit automated information and data.


Appendix D contains a glossary of selected computer security and procurement
terms.




                                         3
                                      CHAPTER II
                                     BACKGROUND

This chapter provides a general introduction to computer security and FIP
procurement.   The section on computer security is targeted for contracting officers.
The section  on FIP procurement is targeted for computer security officials. The
sections are not complete step-by-step procedures, but provide background for the
rest of the guideline.


A.     COMPUTER SECURITY
Computer security is the protection of the integrity, availability and, if needed,
confidentiality of automated information and the resources used to enter, store,
process, and   communicate it.   Computer security is often referred to in conjunction
with system trustworthiness, integrity, safety, availability, and reliability.   In the
federal government, the primary policy mandates for protecting computer assets are
in   OMB Circular A- 130, "Management of Federal Information Resources,"
           Appendix III, "Security of Federal Automated Information Systems," and
specifically
the Computer Security Act of 1987.


This section addresses basic computer security concepts and practices, based on
OMB   Circular A- 130 and the Computer Security Act. Understanding these concepts
and practices helps procurement initiators and contracting officers properly integrate
computer security considerations into procurements.



A.l.    BASIC COMPUTER SECURITY CONCEPTS

Several basic concepts in computer security are described below:


Management Issue.        Computer security is an increasingly important issue for all
federal managers.    Modern technology allows federal agencies to store and process
vast amounts of data in support of agency functions. Federal computer and
information assets have great value and need to be managed to the same extent as
the more traditional organizational assets (i.e., employees, money, equipment, natural
resources, and time).


Value of Information and Computing Resources. The value of federal
information and computing resources and the importance of federal agency missions
create a need for these resources to be adequately protected. Owners and users of
the information provide the impetus for protecting these valuable resources.



                                             5
Functional Requirement.         Computer security is a functional requirement of most
systems.   If data is   not accurate, complete, timely, available, and, if necessary,
confidential, then the system may be unable to perform its basic function.


Individual Privacy.  Automated information about individuals must be protected in
accordance with the Privacy Act of 1974 and other statutes.

Life Cycle Phases.       Many systems are designed, developed, and implemented over
months or years.   A system life cycle is used to manage a system from its inception
through its development, implementation, and operation until its termination. If
security is initially designed into a computer system, the safeguard options are vastly
increased and the security costs over the life of the system are substantially reduced.
Since the system environment and technology may change during the system life
cycle, the security will need tochange also. Therefore, it is important for all
managers to ensure that security is appropriately addressed in all phases of the life
cycle for computer systems, especially in the early planning stages.


Some automated systems are acquired "off-the-shelf" and can be used immediately.
In procuring these systems, initiators must consider the systems' present security
features and expandability to  meet future security needs. Many vendors offer
security features on off-the-shelf systems which may be ordered separately and
installed after the   system is in operation.

Computer Security Incidents.         In recent years federal agencies have become aware
of more computer security incidents.      These incidents result from intentional and
unintentional actions by internal (government and contractor) personnel and outsiders.
These incidents result in monetary losses and decrease an agency's productivity and
even its ability to perform its mission. While advances in computer and
telecommunications technology help prevent many problems, the difficulty of
managing the rapid change and the technical complexity can increase the federal
government's vulnerability to incidents.

Balance.    Absolute security is virtually impossible. Federal agencies cannot totally
protect their computer systems from every possible threat for numerous reasons,
including the following:


       Absolute protection would make the agency's systems virtually inaccessible
       and unusable;

       Some vulnerabilities may not be known, as in the case where application code
       contains security flaws; and




                                                6
         Computer security, like other disciplines, depends on people, who are capable
         of error and dishonesty.


Goal. The goal of federal computer security is to support the mission of the agency
by providing cost-effective protection that assures the integrity, availability, and
confidentiality of automated information and the resources used to process it.
There are few clear rules for accomplishing this goal. Nevertheless, OMB Circular
A- 130 requires that the following types of protective measures be used, alone or in
combination, to cost-effectively provide appropriate protection:

         •     Technical;
         •     Personnel;
         •     Administrative;
         •     Environmental; and
         •     Telecommunications.

Figure  1 shows how protective measures, called safeguards, are used to protect

assets from threats. These safeguards can be internal or external to the system.  A
threat is any circumstance or event with the potential to cause harm to a system in
the form of destruction, disclosure, modification, and/or denial of service. If a
safeguard is missing or inadequate, a threat can "get through" and damage assets.
The damage to the asset has an impact on the agency. The "gap" between the
safeguards is referred to as a vulnerability.           The selection of safeguards for a
specific  computing environment is based on an assessment of the assets, impacts,
threats, probabilities, vulnerabilities and the adequacy, availability, and cost of
safeguards.    This process is called risk analysis.




                                      SAFEGUARD

                                                                      AS5ET5
                                      SAFEGUARD
     THREATS                                                             DATA
                                    VU1 NJFR ARI1 1TY                   FACILITIES
                                                                   HARDWARE/SOFTWARE
                                      SAFEGUARD




                 Figure   1.   Threats, Safeguards, Vulnerabilities,     & Assets.
Multidisciplinary Coordination.       All traditional management disciplines and
functions must be employed in a coordinated fashion to effectively   manage computer
security. Over the years, federal agencies have become    more  dependent on
automation technologies to support all aspects of their operations and missions. As
a result, there are many security-related disciplines, each with its   own set of policies
and procedures.

Figure 2 shows possible functional areas in an agency with responsibilities that
overlap with computer security. Many of these are separate career fields within the
government. Only when all disciplines are working together, in a highly coordinated
fashion, can the entire security process function properly and efficiently. Thus,
computer security managers at all levels must regularly coordinate with personnel in
other security-related disciplines.




                                             8
Figure 2.   Multidisciplinary Coordination.




                     9
A.2.      BASIC COMPUTER SECURITY PRACTICES

In practice, certain basic actions are necessary in all federal   computer security
programs. These include:

Develop Computer Security Policy/Procedures.          Computer security policies and
procedures are needed to define the overall framework for implementing and
sustaining an efficient and cost-effective computer security program at the federal
agency level. The policy establishes lines of authority, roles and responsibilities,
and basic principles and requirements which define the computer security program.
The procedures contain implementation and compliance instructions and management
processes.


Institute    Computer Security Planning. Computer security planning must provide a
consistent approach for determining short- and long-range management objectives,
developing security enhancement proposals, mapping proposals to budget requests,
and assuring the implementation of cost-effective protective measures.

Institute a Sensitivity Identification Process.     The Computer Security Act requires
that agencies identify sensitive systems.     In order to accomplish this, agencies must
institute a process for   determining sensitivity.


Define and Implement a Risk Analysis Program. This program should ensure the
performance of risk analyses on agency systems. Federal managers need to
continually identify and analyze potential threats to their computing and
telecommunications environments and take action to reduce risk exposures to
acceptable levels.


Establish a Protective Measure Baseline.       There are numerous combinations of
technical, personnel, administrative, environmental, and telecommunications protective
measures available to federal managers. While OMB Circular A- 130 defines a
governmentwide security baseline, an organization-specific security baseline can help
an agency ensure adequate protection of resources.

Ensure the Conduct of Certifications and/or Accreditations. Computer security
certifications and/or accreditations are a management control for ensuring that
installed security safeguards are adequate.


Oversee a Multi-layer Compliance Assurance Mechanism. Management and
compliance reviews should be conducted periodically to sustain optimal security
levels.




                                              10
Develop an Incident Response and Reporting Mechanism. Agencies should
develop appropriate responses to security incidents and provide feedback information
to senior management on significant incidents. This reporting also supports the
tracking of agencywide trends.


Ensure Continuous Awareness and Training. Continuous awareness and training
are necessary to elevate and sustain management and personnel awareness and to
provide specific guidance for personnel who design, implement, use, or maintain
computer systems.

Ensure Contingency Planning.            Contingency, disaster recovery, and continuity of
operations plans provide continued processing capability        when other safeguards have
failed to maintain   system reliability or availability.    Such plans should be in place
and tested periodically.

Ensure Personnel Screening.         Personnel who participate in managing, using,
designing, developing, operating, or maintaining computer systems should be
appropriately screened.  The level of screening should be commensurate with the
loss or harm that could  be caused by these individuals. This applies to both federal
and contractor personnel. The Office of Personnel Management defines screening
requirements for federal personnel.


Develop Appropriate Acquisition Requirements. In contracts for hardware,
software, and computer-related services, federal agencies must ensure that:


       appropriate security requirements and specifications are included in statements
       of work; and


       security requirements and specifications are        implemented properly before the
       system   goes into operation.



B.   FIP PROCUREMENT

This section provides a general introduction to FIP procurement for computer
security officials. The section is not a complete "how to" but provides background
for the rest of the guideline.


The acquisition of federal information processing (FIP) resources has discrete
characteristics that distinguishfrom the acquisition of other supplies or services.
                                   it

FIP acquisitions have unique authority, approval, and documentation requirements.
These requirements flow from various laws and are implemented in two primary
regulations:



                                                11
         Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR); and
         Federal Information Resources Management Regulation (FIRMR).


FIP procurement, as defined by the Brooks Act, the Paperwork Reduction
Reauthorization Act, and the FIRMR, involves the acquisition of computer hardware,
software, firmware and related services including telecommunications and support
services.


The FIRMR is the primary regulation for use by federal or executive agencies in
their management, acquisition, and use of information processing resources. It is
issued by the General Services Administration (GSA), which has primary
responsibility for the management of FIP resources in the federal government.


Note:   This section, like the rest of the document, does not address national security
systems or systems covered by the Warner Amendment. (See glossary for a
definition of Warner Amendment systems.)


The following sections address FIP procurement concepts and practices.


B.l.     BASIC PROCUREMENT CONCEPTS

It is            have a basic understanding of the underlying goals and objectives
        essential to
of the government's procurement procedures.     Without this understanding, the
procurement process can be confusing and its rules can appear intractable and
obscure. Under these conditions, it is difficult to include computer security. In
addition, because conflicts and problems sometimes arise during a procurement,
knowledge of the underlying goals and objectives will help the procurement initiator
work with the procurement staff to resolve problems.

The following analysis is a basic tutorial on the essential elements of federal
government procurement. It is not intended to substitute for the FAR, the FIRMR,
or your agency's procurement guidelines.


Federal procurement is governed by its underlying goals.       These goals are:

         to obtain quality   products that meet the government's needs at the best price
         (now and in the future);

         to   promote innovation and growth in American industry; and




                                              12
       topromote the social and economic development of certain segments of
       American society.

The government attempts to meets its goals with certain objectives.       These
objectives are derived       from the goals and the fundamental nature of how the
government operates.         The objectives are:

       Competition. The government recognizes that competition causes offerors to
       lower price and increase quality in order to win contracts. Competition is the
       primary means of attaining economy and efficiency in satisfying the needs of
       the government. The government recognizes that new sources must be
       considered to increase the number of options, to stimulate new ideas by
       providing an accessible market, and to be fair to all businesses interested in
       selling to the government.


       Fairness.        In order to achieve meaningful competition, the government must
       conduct procurements fairly. By offering all vendors and new ideas a fair
       chance, the government encourages growth.


       Promotion of small, minority-owned, woman-owned, and disadvantaged
       businesses. The government recognizes that the socio-economic development
       of these groups is to the advantage of the country.          This objective is closely
       related to the previous objective.


Given these diverse goals for the procurement process and the myriad individual
situations,   it is   possible for conflicts to arise in the process.



B.2.   BASIC FIP PROCUREMENT PRACTICES

The administration of these goals and objectives in FIP procurement is governed by
laws and regulations which are implemented in the FAR, the FIRMR, and agency
regulations. While these sources contain much more information, the following is a
brief list of fundamental practices.


GSA Responsibility. GSA has authority for the management and oversight of FIP
procurement.          Agencies, however, are responsible for defining their requirements.
GSA exercises its authority in a number of ways:

       Delegation of Procurement Authority (DPA). GSA exercises its authority
       through the use of DPAs. Without a DPA, an agency cannot acquire FIP
       resources. There are three types of delegations: regulatory, specific agency,




                                                   13
         and specific acquisition.   GSA can withdraw or limit DPAs and can refuse to
         grant DPAs until procurements conform to GSA standards.


         GSA Reviews. GSA conducts periodic reviews to assess how agencies are
         acquiring and managing FIP resources.


         General Services Board of Contract Appeals (GSBCA). The GSBCA was
         created by the Competition in Contracting Act of 1984 to hear protests
         relating to FIP procurement. (Contract cases can also be heard by the
         General Accounting Office, the procuring agency, or the courts.) The
         GSBCA can uphold or overturn procurements and can suspend an agency's
         DPA.

         Vendors can protest a specification or action of the government relating to a
         particular procurement if the protest meets certain administrative and legal
         constraints. Vendors can protest that a specification is restrictive, that the
         agency does not require a certain specification, or that the government was
         unfair or did not follow its procedures correctly.    The protesting of
         specifications has caused the   government to not only identify requirements,
         but also justify them.


         A protest can delay a procurement for months or years and can result in an
         agency having to amend the solicitation or, in a worse case, issue a new
         solicitation. A solicitation that is well justified by the supporting
         documentation is essential to minimize protests and to lessen their duration.

Full    and Open Competition. The Competition in Contracting Act of 1984 requires
the government to use full and open competition.   Sometimes procurement initiators
are confused about the definition of full and open competition. Full and open
competition is achieved when all responsible sources are given the opportunity to
submit a proposal and be considered.

Full and open competition     is                      when there is more than one
                                   not necessarily achieved
source. Consideration of three products does not mean that the government can
refuse to consider a fourth responsible source. The government must consider
products from all responsive and responsible sources.         (See glossary for definitions
of responsive and responsible.)


Note:    There are exceptions to full and open competition that are described in
FAR 6.3.




                                               14
B.3.   PROCUREMENT CYCLE FROM THE PROCUREMENT INITIATOR'S
POINT OF VIEW

The procurement initiator is the sponsor or program manager who represents the
organization that needs the FIP resources.    This person often becomes the
contracting officer's (technical) representative   (COR or COTR) after award. The
procurement cycle is the progression of stages in the process of acquiring property
or services. From the procurement initiator's point of view, the procurement cycle
consists of four stages:   planning, solicitation, source selection, and contract
administration and closeout.


Planning. Procurement planning can be divided into two subsections: general
planning and the specific planning for a procurement. Part 7 of the FAR provides
additional guidance on acquisition planning.


Solicitation.   Solicitation refers to the process of asking vendors for proposals (also
called offers) or bids. This guideline addresses the Request for Proposals (RFP)
because it is the most common and most complex form of solicitation. There are
other methods, such as the Invitation for Bids (DFB) or Request for Quotes (RFQ).
The ideas in this guideline can be used for all types of solicitations.

An RFP has 13 sections, which are generally referred to by letter.      Figure 3    lists   the
sections.   Appendix A contains a chart describing the sections.



       Letter        Section Title


       A        Solicitation/Contract Form - Standard Form 33
       B        Supplies or Services and Prices and Costs
       C        Descriptions/Specif icat ions /Work Statement
       D        Packaging and Marking
       E        Inspection and Acceptance
       F        Deliveries or Performance
       G        Contract Administration Data
       H        Special Contract Requirements
       I        Contract Clauses
       J        List of Attachments
       K        Representations, Certifications, and Other
                Statements of Offerors or Quoters
       L        Instructions, Conditions, and Notices to Offerors
       M        Evaluation Factors for Award


                     Figure    3.    RFP Sections.


                                             15
Source Selection.      Source selection is the process of evaluating offers against
criteria stated in the solicitation and selecting the offer that best meets the
government's requirements. Source selection can involve various forms of
interactions with offerors including negotiations, clarification requests, discussions,
and best and final offers (BAFOs). It can also include performance and capability
testing.  In addition, the government must notify unsuccessful offerors and debrief
them, if requested.

Contract Administration and Closeout.          Contract administration refers to the
management of the contract, including inspection and acceptance of deliverables and
modification of the contract.   It   occurs after actual contract award.   Contract
administration duties are shared by the contracting officer and the contracting
officer's technical representative         Closeout is the action that is taken when
                                     (COTR).
performance under the contract is completed.

Procurement Cycle Figure. A figure showing the FIP procurement cycle from the
procurement initiator's point of view is presented in figure 4. Chapter three will
expand on the figure by incorporating computer security activities. Procurement
initiators who are unfamiliar with the procurement cycle should obtain additional
guidance from their procurement office.

Many of the actions taken by the contracting officer are not reflected in this figure.




                                               16
                         PROCUREMENT CYCLE
          FROM THE PROCUREMENT INITIATOR'S POINT OF VIEW


          Planning             Solicitation Source       Adminis-
General         Procurement                 Selection    tration &
                Specific                                 Closeout


Strategic/     Requirements Statement        Evaluation   Inspection   &
Tactical       Analysis     of Work          of Proposals Acceptance
Planning
              Analysis of Evaluation                      COTR
Needs         Technical    Plan                           Responsi-
Determination Alternatives                                bilities
                           Review of
              Feasibility Solicitation
              Study

                Cost/Benefit
                Analysis

                Software
                Conversion
                Study

                Market
                Study




                     Figure    4.   Procurement Cycle.




                                      17



                                                             /
                                     CHAPTER III
 INCORPORATING COMPUTER SECURITY INTO THE PROCUREMENT
                        CYCLE

To effectively include computer security in the procurement process it must be
integrated into the procurement cycle from its inception.   This guideline focuses on
the computer   security components of the procurement cycle. Sufficient information
about the procurement cycle is included to allow a person not familiar with the
procurement process to understand the chapter. This chapter does not provide a
complete description of the procurement process. (See the FAR and the FIRMR for
detailed procurement information.)


A.   PARTICIPANTS

There are many participants who can have a computer security or oversight role in
procurements depending on the nature and scope of the system. These participants
are listed both by type of role and by functional title. The names for the roles and
titles will vary in different organizations. Each of these does not necessarily provide
input in every phase. For instance, support contractors and vendors are restricted
from participating in some phases. The determination of which participants need to
be consulted is as unique as the procurement.

The list of participating groups and offices below is not all inclusive, but does
represent many of the functions that can impact security.


      Procurement Initiator/Sponsor
      Functional Manager/Owner of data
      Users
      Procurement/Contracts
      Certification/Accreditation
      Computer Security
      Quality Assurance/Quality Control/Safety
      Legal
      Information Resources Management
      Design/Engineering
      Budget
      Audit/Internal Control
      Physical/Personnel Security
      Facilities/Logistics
       Support Contractors/Consultants
      Manufacturers/Suppliers/V endors


                                           19
The length of the list is indicative of the difficulty of managing and acquiring FIP
resources. It is vital that these groups work together to ensure that important
aspects of the procurement are addressed.


As with any acquisition, it is important to involve the contracting officer as early as
possible, preferably in the planning stage.




B.     COMPUTER SECURITY IN THE PROCUREMENT CYCLE
The purpose of this section is to define steps that will integrate computer security
into the procurement cycle. The section explains each of the computer security
steps of each phase of the procurement cycle.       During the procurement cycle, the
technical and security requirements will be advanced together.


Figure 6, Computer Security in the Procurement Cycle, located at the end of this
chapter, illustrates   how security fits into the procurement cycle.   It   expands on
figure 4 in chapter two and     maps security-related activities to the procurement
activities already   being performed.   This chapter will explain each computer security
activity in figure 6.


The computer security steps in this section describe analyses and processes to be
accomplished. These steps define a conceptual framework for computer security
planning during the procurement cycle. This framework is intended to be used as
an example; it is not a definitive methodology. The framework contains descriptions
of a core set of planning considerations that will lead to the production of computer
security acquisition specifications, as required by   OMB Circular A- 130. Agencies
can use other methodologies or modify the one presented here.



B.l.    PLANNING
The first phase in the procurement cycle is planning.   Planning is normally divided
into General Planning and Procurement Specific Planning. General planning
involves planning on an organizational level. This section addresses the needs
determination component of general planning. Procurement specific planning
involves planning for a specific system or acquisition. In this document,
procurement specific planning is further broken down into the Requirements Analysis
and Other Planning Components.




                                              20
B.l.a.     Needs Determination

The needs determination is an initial definition of a problem that might be solved
through automation. It is also called a requirements determination. Traditional
components of the needs determination are a basic system idea, a preliminary
requirements definition, feasibility assessment, technology assessment, and some form
of approval to further investigate the problem.


A need may have been determined from strategic or tactical planning. The following
definitions are from the GSA publication Acquisition of Information Resources:
Overview Guide.

          Strategic planning defines themajor information resources activities and types
          of information required by the organization and produces a high-level strategy
          for pursuing the organization's information resource needs.


          Tactical planning   is   the identification, scheduling,   management, and control of
          tasks necessary to accomplish individual activities identified in the strategic
          plan.


Acquisition planning can only begin after an agency has determined that a need
exists.The needs determination phase is very high-level in terms of functionality.
No specifics of a system are defined here. The idea for a new or substantially
upgraded system and the feasibility of the idea are explored. During this early
phase of the acquisition, the definition of the security requirement should begin with
the preliminary sensitivity assessment.


Preliminary sensitivity assessment.           The preliminary sensitivity assessment should
result in a brief qualitative description of the basic security         needs of the system.
These should be expressed in terms of the need for integrity, availability, and
confidentiality.


This does not require an elaborate sensitivity analysis scheme, but does require an
assessment of the significance of the systems. Legal implications, federal policy,
agency policy, and the functional needs of the system help determine its sensitivity.
Factors including the importance of the system to the agency mission and the
consequences of unauthorized modification, unauthorized disclosure, or unavailability
of the system or data should be considered when assessing sensitivity.




                                                  21
B.l.b.    Requirements Analysis

The requirements analysis is an indepth study of the need.         Itdraws on the work
done during the needs determination and develops it.          Requirements analyses are
required by FIRMR Part 201-20.102:


                Agencies shall establish and document requirements for
                FIP (federal information processing) resources by
                conducting a requirements analysis commensurate with the
                size and complexity of the need.


The following computer security components should be included in a requirements
analysis:


         Analysis of integrity, availability, and confidentiality requirements;
         Update sensitivity assessment;
         Analysis of the level of assurance required;
         Planning phase risk analysis; and
         Preliminary certification/accreditation plan.


As stated above, these analyses present a conceptual framework for computer
security planning. They are intended to be used as a guide, example, or roadmap.
Other methods of computer security planning are acceptable.

While this section presents the computer security components of the requirements
analysis in sequential fashion, they can be done in a different order. For more
complex systems, they will need to be done cyclically until all of the components
work together. For smaller acquisitions, all of the components can be combined into
one analysis. Figure 5 at the end of this section shows how the computer security
components of the requirements analysis phase can interact.

Analysis of integrity, availability, and confidentiality requirements. Computer
security is defined as the process for determining, cost-justifying, and applying the
technological safeguards and managerial procedures to protect information processing
resources, including data, hardware, software, telecommunications, and related
services.  In practice, the need for protection is expressed in terms of the need for
integrity, availability,   and confidentiality.   Integrity can be looked at from several
perspectives.  From a user's or application owner's perspective, integrity is a quality
of data that is based on attributes such as accuracy and completeness. From a
systems or operations perspective, integrity is the quality of data that it is only
changed in an authorized manner or that the system/software/process does what it is
supposed to do and nothing more. Like integrity, availability also has a multi-part
definition. Availability is the state when data or a system is in the place needed by



                                                  22
the user, at the time the user needs it, and in the form needed   by the user.
Confidentiality is the privacy, secrecy, or nondisclosure of information except to
authorized individuals.


The first step in the analysis is to determine what the protection requirements are.
The analysis will be built upon the sensitivity assessment done during the needs
determination, but will be more indepth and specific.


This process should include an analysis of laws and regulations such as the Privacy
Act, the Federal Manager's Financial Integrity Act, the Computer Security Act,
OMB    circulars, agency enabling acts, and other legislation and federal regulations
which define baseline security requirements.     After a review of mandated
requirements, agencies should consider functional and other security requirements.


At this level, as opposed to the needs determination level, the analysis should be
system specific. The legal, functional, and other computer security requirements
should be stated in specific terms. For complex systems, this will require more than
one iteration of the requirements analysis components.

Since most systems have at least minimal integrity and availability requirements,
care should be taken to address these areas clearly. Computer security is more than
confidentiality.   Even systems with no confidentiality requirement need security to
meet integrity and availability requirements.

Update Sensitivity Assessment.      After completing the analysis of integrity,
availability, and confidentiality requirements, the sensitivity assessment should be
updated based on the results.

Analysis of the level of assurance required. The correct and effective use of
computer security controls is a fundamental building block of system security.
Assurance is the degree to which the purchaser of a system knows that the security
features and procedures being acquired will operate correctly and will be effective in
the purchaser's environment.


Obtaining assurance can be quite difficult because assurance can be expensive and
can be hard to quantify. This analysis needs to address how much confidence is
needed that the computer security will work correctly and effectively. The analysis
should be based on both legal and functional requirements and will be the basis for
determining how much and what kinds of assurance are required. This assurance
analysis will lead directly to the evaluation plan which will be developed in the
solicitation phase. It can also be used to help determine appropriate acceptance

criteria.




                                            23
As with other aspects of security, it is important to remember that the goal is cost-
effective security, not absolute security.Absolute security is virtually impossible to
attain and can be cost prohibitive in terms of system usefulness and dollars.


There are many techniques for obtaining assurance. For a further discussion,
including a list of assurance methods, see Appendix B.


Review by Other Functional Groups.           Depending on the size and scope of the
system, a team or group of participants from the functional groups described in the
beginning of this chapter may be useful. Even for small systems, it may be helpful
to get the assistance of the computer security staff.     These functional groups may
have insight into the integrity, availability, confidentiality and assurance
requirements.     Getting these groups involved early in the planning process is
important since it may result in reduced life cycle cost because it is easier to change
requirements in the early stages.


Planning Phase Risk Analysis. The planning phase risk analysis is a critical step.
It isused to determine what types of controls will be cost-effective and forms the
basis for determining mandatory and desirable specifications. OMB Circular A- 130
requires a risk analysis prior to the approval of design specifications.     In addition, a
risk analysis   can provide justification in case specifications are protested.
The planning phase risk analysis will not necessarily be a large and complex
document. The analysis, like other risk analyses, should consider assets, threats to
the assets, potential vulnerabilities, and   what can be done to reduce vulnerabilities.
The planning phase risk analysis should take into consideration what controls already
exist and their effectiveness. The planning phase risk analysis will probably require
participation   by the other functional groups.

The planning phase risk analysis will use input from the analysis of integrity,
            and confidentiality requirements as the basis for determining the value
availability,
of information assets and the impact of security failures. The selection of
appropriate types of safeguards should take into consideration the results of the level
of assurance analysis.     The planning phase risk analysis, in turn, may point out
deficiencies in the analysis of integrity, availability and confidentiality requirements
or the level of assurance analysis by demonstrating the logical conclusion of the
analyses.


Further information on the planning phase risk analysis is contained in Appendix C.


Review by certification and/or accreditation official.        OMB Circular A- 130
requires that systems be approved for processing based on the adequacy of the
safeguards.     This process is referred to as both certification and accreditation in
different agencies.    The approval is made by either the program manager or a


                                              24
designated approving official.       Since this official has responsibility for accepting the
risk,   it is   prudent to get approval of the certification and/or accreditation approach.
The certification and/or accreditation approach should address the vulnerabilities that
may exist in the system. The approving authority can advise the acquisition team if
the risks appear to be acceptable.        It is   easier to incorporate requirement changes
during the planning stage of a system acquisition than during the solicitation, source
selection, or contract administration stages.


The acquisition team and the approving authority should also discuss what forms of
assurance the approving authority needs to make a decision. This can include
system tests and other items that need to be addressed in the solicitation.          Assurance
is   discussed in Appendix B.


In addition, the procurement initiator and the approving authority should discuss how
changes to the system and its environment will be addressed. The possibility of a
security working group should be discussed. The group can consist of various types
of people such as application sponsors; system, security, or database administrators;
security officers or specialists; and system or application analysts. Section IV.F
presents specifications for this group.


For further information on certification and accreditation see FIPS PUB 102
Guideline for Computer Security Certification and Accreditation.


Cyclical Nature of the Process. As stated in the introduction, these requirements
analysis sub-components may need to be performed cyclically. The components
inter-relateand build on each other. Depending on the size and complexity of the
system, these components may be performed many times as ideas become refined
and focused. The flow model on the next page (fig. 5) shows how the computer
security components of the requirements analysis phase of the procurement cycle can
work together.




                                                   25
FLOW MODEL FOR SECURITY
REQUIREMENTS ANALYSIS




       Figure 5.   Flow Model.



                   26
B.l.c.     Other Planning Components

There are several other parts of the planning process that will incorporate computer
security in their cycles:


         feasibility study,
         system cost-benefit analysis,
         software conversion study,
         analysis of technical alternatives, and
         market surveys.

The feasibility study should also look at the computer security of the system.              If
security     is   not considered during the feasibility study, then it is possible for a
computer system to be acquired for which there is no cost-effective security solution.

The cost-benefit analysis should use input from the planning phase risk analysis.                If
the cost-benefit analysis does not consider security, then it is possible for it to favor
a system which will later require security upgrades (which could be expensive). In
addition, it could favor a system with unnecessary exposures to traumatic failures.


The software conversion study, which examines the cost of re-establishing software
on a new hardware or software base, should include the cost of re-establishing the
desired degree of computer security on the new system and maintaining security
during the transition.


The analysis of technical alternatives should rate the alternatives against their ability
to   meet all the requirements including computer security.

The market surveys, which may include Requests for Comment (RFCs) or Requests
for Information (RFIs), should include the         computer security requirements.

At the end of the planning phase, the government will have determined the
requirements and the best ways to achieve them. This will include a decision on
whether a requirement can be met through acquisition or in-house development.
Many systems combine these methods.     Since the planning phase looks at the whole
system, the computer security and other functional requirements should have been
adequately addressed to allow acquisition of components while maintaining system
integrity.


Many agencies have an approval process, which may include computer security, at
the end of the planning phase.          The approval can be used to see if the procurement
incorporates a rational risk-based approach to security planning.          (It is   not necessary




                                                  27
for the procurement initiator to   have exactly followed the steps outlined in this
special publication; other approaches can be used.)




B.2.     SOLICITATION

The second phase in the procurement cycle is the solicitation phase.This covers the
development and issuance of the request for proposals (RFP) and the receipt of
proposals.


All considerations surrounding the acquisition of the product or service must be
addressed in the solicitation. This includes the description of what is being
acquired; how it will be acquired; how it will be evaluated, tested, and accepted;
and how the contract will be administered. Although the actual evaluation of
proposals or the administration of the contract happens in later phases, these areas
must be addressed now.

An RFP is designed to allow the government to make a best value decision based
on an offeror's proposal. One of the strengths of the RFP process is the flexibility
itprovides the government and the offeror to negotiate a contract that best meets the
government's needs.

The government can identify needed computer security features, procedures, and
assurances in many ways. An RFP can be a flexible document which allows for
substantial creativity.   Guidance on procurement alternatives should be obtained from
the agency procurement office or the contracting officer.


Because of the flexibility, it is impossible to address precise mapping of the
computer security considerations into the uniform solicitation. The procurement
initiator needs to decide how the computer security considerations will be met given
the    many options an RFP provides.

This guideline explains some of the considerations for developing a statement of
work/specification and provides general guidance about evaluation, testing, and
acceptance of the computer security features.    The procurement initiator must decide
how a given feature, procedure, or assurance fits in the RFP.     In addition, this
guideline provides guidance about clauses.




                                            28
B.2.a.   Specifications   and Work

The statement of work (SOW) or specification is based on the requirements analysis.
This section describes two types of sources for computer security specifications:
general specifications and federally mandated specifications.


Security requirements can be included in the   SOW as specifications, tasks, labor,
work, level of effort, etc. The procurement initiator should concentrate on what is
required and work with the contracting officer to determine how to ask for it.


General Specifications

There are many sources of general computer security specifications. NIST guidance
documents, such as this one, and guidance from other federal agencies and
commercial groups are some sources. The indexes to NIST documents are
referenced below and are updated periodically. Also, DoD has extensive material
that can be used for guidance. The Trusted Computer Systems Evaluation Criteria
(TCSEC) or "Orange Book" is a DoD standard that defines many computer security
specifications. The TCSEC is a DoD standard but NOT a federal government
standard. There are also specifications in other DoD and other agency computer
security guidelines. Commercial sources and trade organizations also publish general
computer security specifications.

These computer security documents can be reviewed for applicability to the
system(s) being procured. They may represent areas that were overlooked and they
can save time since they provide already prepared SOW language. Care should be
taken when selecting features, procedures, and assurances from these sources. The
items may be grouped based on interdependencies between the items. It is
necessary to understand the features, procedures, assurances, and groupings before
specifying them separately.


Each specification must be justified from the requirements analysis, specifically from
the planning phase risk analysis. Safeguards recommended by a general source
should be considered, but they should not be included in an RFP if the risk analysis
does not support them.

Federally   Mandated Specifications

There are other sources of computer security (and nonsecurity) specifications which
are required by law to be included in the RFP. These are often referred to as
directed specifications. All federal agencies must require that systems comply with
applicable FIPS PUBS and Federal Standards. Executive agencies must comply with
OMB Circular A- 130. There are also agency- specific directed specifications, which

                                          29
are official policies issued with the concurrence of agency legal and procurement
officials.


Directed specifications must be incorporated in an RFP if the system being acquired
matches the criteria in the directed specification.     It is very important to be aware of

directed specifications.   If specifications in   an RFP conflict with directed
specifications, a waiver   must be obtained.

The following publications contain lists of standards including FIPS PUBS and
Federal Standards:


          NIST Publications List 58 - Federal Information Processing Standards
          Publications (FIPS PUBS) Index
          NIST Publication List 88 - Computer Systems Publications
          NIST Publications List 91 - Computer Security Publications
          GSA Handbook "Federal ADP and Telecommunications Standards Index"

Ordering information for NIST publications is printed on the inside back cover of
this document.  The GSA Handbook is available from the Government Printing
Office.


Another source for directed specifications is the Model Framework for Management
Control Over Automated Information Systems published jointly by the President's
Council on Management Improvement and President's Council on Integrity and
Efficiency. This document provides guidance on requirements for control imposed
by the Federal Manager's Financial Integrity Act of 1982, the Privacy Act of 1974,
and OMB Circulars A-123, A-127, and A-130. The Framework states, "...federal
managers are expected to:
       Understand the 55 control requirements identified in the report; and
       Implement a program that demonstrates compliance with the requirements."

It is   incumbent on the procurement initiator to know what federal standards apply to
the system(s) being procured.     Many people erroneously feel that this is the
responsibility of the contracting officer. These are technical issues and are,
therefore, the responsibility of the procurement initiator.


B.2.b.     Evaluation

Evaluation is the process of determining if an offer meets the minimum requirements
described in the RFP and an assessment of the offeror's ability to successfully
accomplish the prospective contract. This involves a technical analysis of the merits
of a proposal. As part of the solicitation phase, the procurement initiator, working
with the contracting officer, develops an evaluation plan to determine the basis for



                                               30
the evaluation and   how it will be conducted. The evaluation itself is performed
during the source selection phase of the procurement.


Developing an Evaluation Plan.

When evaluating computer security features, it can be difficult to assess if the offer
meets the minimum requirements or can successfully accomplish the prospective
contract.   Therefore, offerors should have to provide assurance to the government
that hardware and software claims regarding computer security features are true and
that the offeror can provide the proposed services.   Since computer security, like
other parts of computer systems, is a complex and important subject, the offeror's
assertions may not provide sufficient assurance. Appendix B further discusses
assurance and presents ideas for how the government can obtain it. In addition,
section IV.D provides descriptions of documentation that can be used for assurance
in the evaluation phase, such as the offeror's strategy for security.


How assurances are provided may, in fact, determine the ability of the government
to adequately assess them. Security personnel need to be sure they are asking for
the information they really need. If, after award, the government determines that
more assurance is required, the government may be liable for additional costs.

The determination of how the offerors will be required to provide assurance should
be considered when developing the evaluation plan. This plan will be used to help
develop sections of the RFP which provide instructions to the offerors and
information about how the proposals will be evaluated and how source selection will
be performed.

As part of this process, a determination of security acceptance testing should be
made.   It   may be important to coordinate evaluation and acceptance to effectively
manage the security review and testing of proposals and deliverables.

Items to Consider in the Evaluation Plan.

The remainder of this section presents ideas to assist with the development of the
computer security aspects of the evaluation plan. One aspect of the evaluation plan
is selecting evaluation team members.   Section III.B.3, Source Selection, discusses
some of the roles and duties of the evaluation team.

When the evaluation plan is developed, keep in mind that alternatives may conflict
with each other.  For example, features which provide computer security can conflict
with those that provide ease of use. The government must make it clear how
offerors should propose different configurations and present conflicting options and




                                            31
trade-offs.  However, care should be taken to keep proposal size manageable to
facilitate review and to keep proposal preparation costs down.


When computer security is important in the acquisition, it must be addressed in the
evaluation criteria so that offerors will know that it is important to the government.
Offerors look at the RFP to determine what the government considers most
important.


Testing is one method of determining if the proposed system or product can meet
the   computer security requirements.    Depending on the nature of the system, this can
be part of the proposal evaluation, in the form of live test demonstrations or
benchmarks, or it can be part of post-award acceptance testing. During the
evaluation process there are different times when the testing can occur.     There are
cost, technical,   and procurement integrity considerations for deciding when testing is
done.      In general, expensive tests should be kept to a minimum.   This will help
control offeror proposal preparation costs. Not only do expensive proposals limit
competition, but the costs are ultimately passed to the government in higher contract
costs.  Guidance on testing alternatives should be obtained from the contracting
officer.


Note:      Be sure the computer system testing, especially performance testing, is done
with the computer security features enabled.


Warning:      The more the procurement initiator knows about the market place, the
easier it is to develop an evaluation plan.    Proposals cannot be used for market
research.     The evaluation plan virtually cannot be changed after the receipt of
proposals.     Additional knowledge learned by reading proposals cannot be used to
modify the evaluation plan. It is worth the time to research what kind of
alternatives could be offered so a scheme that reflects the true priorities of the
government can be developed.

B.2.c.     Special Contract Requirements


There are elements in an RFP that are computer security-related but are not
contained in the statement of work or the evaluation criteria. These elements
usually address rights, responsibilities, and remedies assigned to the parties of the
contract. Many times such obligations survive the actual performance period of the
contract.     Therefore, such elements are best addressed through specific contract
clauses or requirements.     The nondisclosure of automated information learned during
the course of the contract is one example.




                                              32
Chapter four addresses clauses as well as statement of work items. The
procurement initiator must coordinate with the contracting officer about clauses to be
added to an RFP.



B.3.    SOURCE SELECTION
Source selection is the determination of the successful offeror. The source selection
phase is based on the work done in the planning and solicitation phases. This phase
involves actually evaluating the proposals and making best value decisions based on
the evaluation criteria and other factors stated in the RFP. Computer security
considerations incorporated during the planning and solicitation phases will be a part
of the evaluation and source selection.


An individual with extensive computer security expertise should be part of the
evaluation team.    This expert should be available to review the original proposals as
well as clarifications, discussion points, and best and final offers (BAFOs). A good
review team is essential to the success of a procurement.



B.4.    ADMINISTRATION AND CLOSEOUT

The final phase in the procurement life cycle is administration and closeout.
Computer security issues for administration and closeout should have been addressed
when developing the solicitation. Two important computer security functions during
this   phase are acceptance and monitoring contractor performance.

Acceptance. Acceptance refers to the government's decision to accept, and
therefore, pay for a deliverable. The government should be careful in accepting
deliverables. Testing by the government or an independent validation and
verification (IV &V) contractor to determine that the system does meet specifications
can be very useful. This should include testing the security of the system.

Note:   Acceptance and approval to operate (certification or accreditation) are related,
but different concepts. The government normally accepts a deliverable that meets
                                 The approval to operate is a separate decision
the specifications in the contract.
made based on the risks and advantages of the system. It is incorrect to have the
approval to operate as one of the acceptance criteria.


Monitoring. In general, the government should plan to review contractor
performance to ensure that security has not degraded and that changes in the
environment and system that result in new threats and vulnerabilities are recognized
and appropriate safeguards put in place. For more complex contracts including more


                                           33
than just purchase of hardware, a security working group is an effective way to
monitor security. Section IV.F provides features, procedures, and assurances related
to contract administration    and closeout.

After award, the government's requirements should not change. If they do, there are
mechanisms to modify the contract to accommodate some changes. However, these
modifications can be quite costly.               some changes may require separate
                                       In addition,
procurements.    As noted in the introduction to this document, new security controls
that are retrofitted to a   system may not be as effective as controls designed into the
system.




                                              34
               \                                                                                                   c




                                                                        COMPUTER SECURITY IN
                                                         PLANNING

                        NEEDS                              REQUIREMENTS                  OTHER PLANNING
                        DETERMINATION                      ANALYSIS                      COMPONENTS
                        STRATFGI C/TAfTI CAI                REQUIREMENTS                  _
                                                                                         ri   m
                                                                                              .   _.
                                                                                         FEA5IBLITY STUDY
                        Dl iMMIMR                           ANALYSIS
                                                                                         COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS
                        RASIf SYSTFM IDFA
I—
zz.                                                                                      SOFTWARE CONVERSION
UJ                      PRELIMINARY REQUIREMENTS                                         STUDY
Y.                      DFFINITION
L±J
t_I_

ZD UJ
                                                                                         ANALYSIS OF TECHNICAL
(_J
                        PRELIMINARY FEASIBILITY                                          ALTERNATIVES
o
cr >-
       (_)
                   1




                        ASSESSMENT
CL U                                                                                     MARKET SURVEYS
                        PRELIMINARY TECHNOLOGY
                        AO Jt J Jl C IN
                                    1   1




                       PRELIMINARY SENSITIVITY              INTFGRITY AVAII ARII ITY
                       ASSESSMENT                           fOMFinFMTI Al ITY ANAIY^IS
       CO
       z
                                                           UPDATE SENSITIVITY
       h-                                                  ASSFSSMFMT
>-
       <
   cr
h- UJ
   ^—                                                      LEVEL OF ASSURANCE
       £_J
cc                                                         ANALYSIS
ZD CO
u o
LU
       zz.
                                                           PLANNING PHASE RISK
CO CJ
                                                           ANALYSIS

                                                           REVIEW BY OTHER FUNCTIONAL
                                                           GROUPS

                                                           REVIEW BY CERTIFICATION/
                                                           ALLKtU IAI lUINUrMLIAL
                                                                    1




       1   1   1




       u               III.B.l.a                            III.B.l.b                                  III. B.I.

Z UJ
  zz
o cr
f—     UJ
LJ     u_
UJ     UJ
CO     cr



                                   Figure   6.   Computer Security in the Procurement Cycle.


                                                                  35
THE PROCUREMENT CYCLE
                                SOURCE              AnkJllMICTDATinM
                                                    AUMIInIo HA IUIm
                                                                  1   1

SOLICITATION
                                SELECTION           & CLOSEOUT


DEVELOP STATEMENT OF WORK       EVALUATE
                                                    INSPECTION & ACCEPTANCE
                                PROPOSALS
DEVELOP EVALUATION PLAN                             COTR RESPONSIBILITIES

REVIEW SOLICITATION




DEVELOP SECURITY ASPECT OF      PARTICPATE IN       INSPECTION & ACCEPTANCE
STATEMENT OF WORK               TECHNICAL           OF SECURITY OF SYSTEM
 SPECIFICATIONS, FEATURES,      EVALUATION
 ASSURANCES, TASKS                                  SECURITY WORKING GROUP
                                EVALUATE SECURITY
DETERMINE SECURITY EVALUATION   ASPECTS OF          PROTECT GOVT
& ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA           PROPOSALS           RESOURCES/ASSETS


REVIEW SOI IflTATION FOR
SECURITY CONCERNS




 III.B.2                          III.B.3               III.B.4
 (entire)



This figure is intended as a guideline. These analyses/components
may have different names at various agencies



                                            35a
/
                                       CHAPTER IV
                   SPECIFICATIONS, CLAUSES, AND TASKS


This chapter provides specifications, tasks, and clauses that can be used in RFPs to
acquire computer security features, procedures, and assurances. None of the
specifications, tasks, or clauses are mandatory. They are intended as a source of
general specifications, as defined in section III.B.2.a. They are written for different
types of acquisitions including purchase of off-the-shelf products, purchase of
integrated systems, development of applications, and other computer-related services.


The specifications, tasks, and clauses are divided into ten categories.   Within each
category there may be specifications, tasks, and/or clauses as well as explanations,
considerations, and/or prescriptions about their use.   The specifications, tasks, and
clauses are printed in  courier typeface. Explanations, considerations, and
prescriptions are in regular type face. None of the specifications, tasks, or clauses
should be used blindly.      Each of them should be tailored to meet individual
circumstances.   The categories are:

      A.     General Computer Security

      B.     Control of Hardware and Software


      C.     Control of Information/Data


      D.     Documentation

      E.     Legal Issues

      F.     Contract Administration, End of Task, Closeout


       G.    Computer Security Training

       H.    Personnel Security


       I.    Physical Security


       J.     Computer Security Features in Systems

A word of caution on the use of subcontractors:       Ensure applicable computer
security requirements and/or certifications placed   on prime contractors are also
reflected in subcontracts.    This is called "flowdown."



                                             37
The categories above do not address tasking language for specific security services
such as having a risk analysis performed or having contractors prepare security
planning documents. Tasking language for these types of services are provided in
another NIST report, Sample Statements of Work for Federal Computer Security
Services.




                                          38
                           A.   General Computer Security



In keeping with   OMB Circular A- 130, Appendix III, security responsibility must be
assigned.   The responsibility must rest with a government employee.   This item
                                            If the contract calls for computer
should be included to clarify responsibility.
security administration,management, or support, the delineation of responsibilities
should be clear, with the government person retaining ultimate responsibility.

The person responsible for computer security is                             .




The following can be used to show the relationship between agency ownership of
federal information processing (FIP) resources and contractor use.   These clauses
help establish clear lines of authority and responsibility.

The government authorizes the use of agency computer resources (list
specific resources if appropriate) for contractor performance of the
effort required by the statement of work of this contract.

The contractor shall comply with the requirements of the agency
computer security program as defined by (insert agency handbook,
directives, manuals, etc.)




                                            39
                              B.   Control of Hardware and Software



The government should consider who can introduce hardware and software onto the
system and under what circumstances.

Introduction and      Change of Software - In order to reduce the chance of viruses and
other forms of malicious code, of illegal use of licensed software, and of software
that   may open security vulnerabilities (such as operating system utilities or untested
software updates), consider restricting contractors by using the following types of
specifications and tasks. These specifications and tasks could be used when the
contractor is providing a service such as running or maintaining a government
computer system.

Only licensed software and in-house developed code (including
government and contractor developed) shall be used on (system
name(s))   No public domain, shareware, or bulletin board software
            .



shall be installed unless prior written approval is obtained from
the contracting officer or COTR.

The following specification is fairly restrictive.    The alternatives which follow can
be used to modify the specification.

The only hardware and software packages that shall be used on
(system name s    is (listed here or specify section).
                  (   )   )                            All
additional hardware and software packages proposed for use,
including upgrades, must be approved in advance and in writing by
the contracting officer or COTR.

Alternatives
     The contractor shall provide a list of software and hardware
     changes          working days in advance of installing (or
     other time or performance period)

         The contractor shall provide an impact analysis for proposed
         hardware and software changes that includes an assessment of
         possible new security vulnerabilities (include other assessment
         items required)       working days in advance of installing.

         The contractor shall provide proposed hardware and software for
         testing        working days in advance of loading.

         The contractor shall provide proof of license for new software.

         The contractor shall maintain a list of hardware, firmware, and
         software changes throughout the contract.  The contractor shall



                                                40
       provide this list to the government (specify time frame and/or
       at the end of the contract)

If the contractor isusing their own software, then the following specification can be
used to help protect the government from buying products developed with stolen
software.

The contractor shall provide proof of license for all software used
to perform under this contract.

The following clauses are reprinted from FIRMR Section 201-39.5202-5, Privacy or
Security Safeguards.   FIRMR Section 201-39.1001-3 prescribes that these clauses, or
variations of them, be used in solicitations and contracts requiring security of FIP
resources or for the design, development, or operation of a system or records using
commercial FIP services or support services. Clause (a), which addresses ownership
of and rights to developed software, should be coordinated with the contracting
officer or legal counsel.


 (a) The details of any safeguards that the contractor may design or
develop under this contract are the property of the government and
shall not be published or disclosed in any manner without the
contracting officer's express written consent.

 (b) The details of any safeguards that may be revealed to the
Contractor by the government in the course of performance under this
contract shall not be published or disclosed in any manner without
the contracting officer's express written consent.

 (c) The government shall be afforded full, free, and uninhibited
access to all facilities, installation, technical capabilities,
operations, documentation, records, and data bases for the purpose
of carrying out a program of inspection to ensure continued efficacy
and efficiency of safeguards against threats and hazards to data
security, integrity, and confidentiality.

 (d) If new or unanticipated threats or hazards are discovered by
either the government or the contractor, or if existing safeguards
have ceased to function, the discoverer shall immediately bring the
situation to the attention of the other party. Mutual agreement
shall then be reached on changes or corrections to existing
safeguards or institution of new safeguards, with final
determination of appropriateness being made by the government. The
government's liability is limited to an equitable adjustment of cost
for such changes or corrections, and the government shall not be
liable for claims of loss of business, damage to reputation, or
damages of any other kind arising from discovery of new or
unanticipated threats or hazards, or any public or private
disclosure thereof.

                                          41
One option to modify these clauses is to add a task related to clause (d):

The contractor shall provide an analysis of the new threat, hazard,
or vulnerability and recommend possible fixes or safeguards.

The following two clauses address other issues in the use of government hardware
and software by a contractor providing services. The government should include all
restrictions   such as single site licensing, proper use to maintain warranties,
proprietary code, or special considerations.

Under no circumstances is a contractor permitted to make any use of
agency computer equipment or supplies for purposes other than
performance on this contract.

The following items of government furnished equipment or software
have the following licensing or use restrictions:   (provide list)

The special needs of personal computers should be addressed.   There are many PC
security options such as PC security hardware and software, locks, removable hard
drives, and anti-virus software. Consider if these are needed when PCs are acquired
or if contractors will be using PCs. Remember that a PC used as a terminal is still
a computer.

The contractor shall not allow employees to use files for logging
onto systems that contain the employee's passwords.

Pre-logon warning messages can deter unauthorized use, increase computer security
awareness, and provide a legal basis for prosecuting unauthorized access.     Consider
having an installation, support, or integration contractor configure multi-user systems
with a warning message. Warning messages can also be used on contractor systems
processing federal information.

The system (s) shall be delivered/installed with the following
message appearing before logon:

(or)


Contractor multi-user systems used to process data under this
contract shall use the following pre-logon warning message:




                                             42
WARNING                    WARNING                        WARNING
********************************************************
THIS COMPUTER IS OPERATED BY/FOR THE U.S. GOVERNMENT.         UNAUTHORIZED
ACCESS TO AND/OR USE OF THIS COMPUTER SYSTEM IS A VIOLATION OF LAW
AND PUNISHABLE UNDER THE PROVISIONS OF 18 USC 1029, 18 USC 1030, AND
OTHER APPLICABLE STATUTES.
****************************************1 ***. k ***i. ±i. ici *
                                                    r   )r
                                                             .
                                                                 ic1.*e ic   ic irir   i.


WARNING                    WARNING                        WARNING


Having the contractor provide contingency, continuity of operations, and disaster
recovery plans for government systems or for their own systems that process
government data is another important issue. The following addresses continuity of
operations planning for a mission-essential network, but can be tailored for other
types of systems.  To use this clause, the offerors must have sufficient information
to be able to postulate the types of emergencies that could occur.  It may be

necessary to provide additional detailed specifications to give offerors and evaluators
enough information to prepare/review cost estimates and to make objective
evaluations.


Add to Section L:
As part of the proposal, the offeror shall submit a preliminary
continuity of operations plan to address the planned reaction to
threatened or actual emergencies.  Provisions for testing the plan,
at the option of the agency, must be included in the proposal.

The offeror shall describe how proposed architecture, technical
capabilities and organization will protect the system during
emergency situations. The plan should state what priority the
agency will have in terms of services, replacement hardware, etc.
Examples of how these resources will be brought to bear during an
emergency are required.

The offeror shall describe external emergency management interface
arrangements that will be used with subcontractors if necessary.

The agency is concerned that service may be degraded in a network
environment in which switching systems and transmission channel are
shared with others.  If the offeror proposes such a shared
environment, the offeror must address the following issues:

       protection of critical agency users from access blocking;
       protection of network access ports from saturation caused by
       other traffic that may be using the network access ports; and
       provision of low delay, low blocking access to all necessary
       intercity routes and access facilities for critical users
       during periods of overload.



                                          43
Add to Section C:
After contract award, the contractor shall deliver a draft
continuity of operations plan for the system being acquired for
agency approval within ninety days of receiving the agency approval
and/or guidance on the preliminary plan. The final continuity of
operations plan shall be delivered ninety days after receiving
agency approval and/or guidance on the draft plan. The plan shall
be periodically reviewed and updated annually by the Contractor to
ensure the accuracy and timeliness of the contents.  Recommended
updates and revision based on this review shall be submitted to the
agency for approval       working days prior to incorporation in the
plan

      Summary
           Preliminary plan submitted with proposal;
           Draft plan submitted      working days after agency
           comment on preliminary plan; and
           Final plan submitted      working days after agency
           comment on draft plan.

The continuity of operations plan shall detail the taking of
appropriate and timely action to protect system assets from damage
or misappropriation in the event of the threat of a disaster or
emergency.  The emphasis shall be on avoiding or mitigating the
damage caused by such things as fire, flood, or terrorist activity
(modify to include threats to the system) . The plan shall, at a
minimum:

      Include a risk assessment;
      Identify essential functions or critical processes, components,
      and the relationship of critical workload to variables such as
      time to recovery;
      Identify activities that can be temporarily suspended;
      Identify alternate procedures; and
      Identity action (s) to be taken to mitigate threats.

The continuity of operations plan shall detail the taking of
appropriate and timely action to return assets to use after damage,
destruction, alteration or misappropriation. The system recovery
portion of the plan shall include at a minimum:

      The basic strategy for recovery;
      Specifications for restoration procedures by component and
      subsystem priority; and
      Specific responsibilities for emergency response.

The continuity of operations plan shall state how the plan shall be
tested and how often the tests shall be done. Annual testing is



                                  44
required as a minimum and some tests should be done without advance
notice

As part of continuity of operations/contingency planning, consider how long the
system can be down.

In the event the system or any component is rendered permanently
inoperative, the contractor shall deliver a replacement within
working days from the date of request.

In the event the system or any component is unavailable for use due
to maintenance or repair or other reasons for a period of more than
      hours (or days) or in the event that it is reasonably
                         ,



anticipated that maintenance will exceed      hours, the contractor
shall make a loaner or replacement available within      hours (or
days)




                                         45
                               C.   Control of Information/Data



Contractors    may have to work with information or data that the agency has
designated as nondisclosable.       Clauses should be used to prevent the contractor from
disclosing the information during the course of the contract and after it has
terminated.    It is   important to work with the contracting officer to ensure that
nondisclosure is adequately addressed for both situations.

Any (list type of or all) information made available in any format
shall be used only for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of
this contract.  Information contained in such material shall not be
divulged or made known in any manner to any person except as may be
necessary in the performance of this contract. Disclosure to anyone
other than an authorized officer or employee of the contractor shall
require written approval of the contracting officer (or contracting
officer's technical representat ive/COTR)

Any (list type of) information shall be accounted for upon receipt
and properly stored before, during and after processing.  In
addition, all related output shall be given the same level of
protection as required for the source material.

If it is necessary to disclose (type of) information to perform
under the contract, the contractor shall request written
authorization from the contracting officer (or COTR) to make such
necessary disclosure.

         (1)  Except as provided elsewhere in this contract, the
         contractor shall not disclose (type of information) except to
         the individual specified in this contract.

        (2)  Only those disclosures specifically authorized in writing
        by the contracting officer (or COTR) may be made, and only when
        it is clearly shown by the contractor that such disclosures are
        essential to successfully perform under this contract.

        (3)  Should the contractor or one of his/her employees make any
        unauthorized disclosure s of confidential information, the
                                         (   )



        terms of the Default clause (FAR 52.249-8), incorporated herein
        by reference, may be invoked, and the contractor will be
        considered to be in breach of this contract.

If   nondisclosable information is released to prospective offerors in order for them to
prepare proposals, the following clause can be used during the release of
information.




                                                 46
I hereby certify that I will not disclose (type of information)
unless authorized in writing by the contracting officer (or COTR)
I agree that, whether or not a contract is awarded to me, I will
keep all information confidential.

The following item is to prevent nondisclosable information from leaving the
agency's control through such means as being on a disk drive sent out for
maintenance.

The contractor shall ensure that (list type of) information shall
not be released outside the control of the agency (or specific
agency office)  including release for maintenance or replacement
                 ,


purposes, without the written consent of the contracting officer or
COTR




                                         47
                               D.   Security Documentation



Security documentation provides instruction about the use of the system security,
assurance that the security requirement has been understood, and supports a
demonstration of meeting the requirement. The items below are divided into
proposal and deliverable documentation. In general, documentation that shows that a
requirement has been understood will be received as part of the proposal and will be
used to evaluate the offeror. Instructional documentation will, in general, be
received as a deliverable after contract award. Documentation, such as test
documentation, that demonstrates that the contractor has successfully met the security
requirement will normally be received as a deliverable after contract award.

Depending on the nature of what is being acquired, these types of documentation
can be mixed. For instance, an approach, abstract, or outline of a Security Features
User's Guide can be included in the proposal with the final version as a deliverable.
In the proposal phase, the document would be used to evaluate the offeror's
understanding of the security requirement and their ability to meet the requirement.
As a deliverable, this would become instructional documentation. Be sure
documentation requested with the proposal is used for evaluation of the offer and
does not constitute having the offeror prepare deliverables before award.

Depending on what is being acquired, be sure to get system level documentation,
not just component documentation. For any type of documentation at the system
level, the contractor   should describe the system security requirement and how it has
been implemented. The operating system documentation plus the security system
documentation plus application documentation does not equal system documentation.
System security documentation includes interrelationships among applications and
with the operating system and utilities in its environment. Component
documentation will generally be off-the-shelf, whereas system documentation will
generally be developed by the contractor.


Itmay be necessary to provide additional detailed specifications, including content
and delivery schedule, to give offerors and evaluators enough information to
prepare/review cost estimates and to make objective evaluations.


PROPOSAL DOCUMENTATION
Offeror's strategy for security. This should be commensurate with the size and
complexity of the system. All systems acquisitions should request some form of
offeror security strategy. In this strategy, the offeror should state how the product
or service will meet the security needs of the government.    Offerors of off-the-shelf
products should match the features of the packages to government specifications and



                                            48
address assurance.  For complex system development efforts, this could include a
plan for incorporating and assuring security throughout the development. An
example of a clause requesting such a plan follows.

The offeror shall provide a plan that describes its automated
information security program. The plan shall address the security
measures and program safeguards which will be provided to ensure
that all information systems and resources acquired and utilized in
the performance of the contract by contractor and subcontractor
personnel

       (1)        Operate effectively and accurately;
       (2)        Are protected from unauthorized alteration, disclosure,
                  or misuse of information processed, stored, or
                  transmitted;
       (3)        Can maintain the continuity of automated information
                  support for agency missions, programs, and function;
       (4)        Incorporate management, general, and application controls
                  sufficient to provide cost-effective assurance of the
                  system's integrity and accuracy, and
       (5)        Have appropriate technical, personnel, administrative,
                  environmental, and access safeguards.

This plan will be included in any resulting contract for contractor
compliance

Offeror's internal security policy and plan. Procurements that include contract
services can ask for this type of assurance document. Depending on the scope of
the acquisition, this may include copies of the offeror's applicable computer security,
personnel security, and physical security policies.


DELIVERABLE DOCUMENTATION

Security Features User's Guide.          A description of the protection mechanisms
provided by the system, guidelines on their use, and      how they interact with one
another.     If   a system is being procured, be sure to get system level documentation,
as well as product documentation.


System Administrator/Facility Manual.           A manual addressed to the system
administrator that presents cautions about functions and privileges that should be
controlled when running the system or facility in a secure manner. The procedures
for examining and maintaining security features requested (such as audit record
structures) should also be requested. The manual should describe the operator and
administrator functions related to security, to include changing the security
characteristics of a user. It should provide guidelines on the consistent and effective
use of the protection features of the system, how they interact, warning, and


                                               49
privileges that need to be controlled in order to operate the system or facility in a
secure manner.    If   a system is being procured, be sure to get system level
documentation, as well as product documentation.

Test documentation.       A report that describes the test plan, test procedures that
show how the security mechanisms were tested and results of the security
mechanisms' functional testing.

Design documentation.        A report that provides a description of the manufacturer's
or developer's philosophy of protection and an explanation of how this philosophy is
translated in the system.    This report can be the post-contract award counterpart of
the offeror's strategy for security;   it   describes how the strategy was implemented.
This can also include an informal or formal description of a security policy model
and an explanation of how the system enforces the security policy. For systems
requiring very high security assurance, formal description languages and
mathematical modeling may also be included.

Additional information on documentation for automated systems is available from the
following FIPS PUBs:


       FIPS 38         Guidelines for Documentation of Computer Programs and
                       Automated Data Systems
       FIPS 64         Guidelines for Documentation of Computer Programs and
                       Automated Systems for the Initiation Phase




                                                50
                                      E.   Legal Issues



The contracting officer and the legal department need to be consulted about legal
issues. This section addresses some issues that the procurement initiator may want
to discuss with    agency procurement and legal staff.

It is   possible for computer products to cause security violations even if the products
are functioning correctly. These violations could be caused by the product
containing malicious code (i.e., virus or trojan horse), making operating system calls
that bypass system controls, or containing undocumented backdoors that bypass
security.    Many manufacturers include backdoors so they can assist customers.

The FAR contains general clauses which define the respective responsibilities and
allocate risks among the parties to a government contract. However, additional
clausesmay be needed to fully address specific computer security requirements.
Such clauses, for example, may address guarantees, warranties, or liquidated
damages. The specific wording of such clauses may vary from one solicitation to
another because they are a function of the particular need for data integrity,
confidentiality or availability   and the nature of the system being protected.

Agencies may wish to consider the use of warranties, liquidated damages, and other
clauses establishing the contractor's computer security-related responsibilities in
contracts.    Such clauses, when properly crafted, will provide incentive to the
contractor to assure that its products and services meet the security requirements of
the contract.    Such clauses, when poorly drafted or overly broad, can unnecessarily
increase contract costs, limit competition, complicate contract administration and
increase litigation risk.   These clauses must be prepared in conjunction with existing
FAR clauses.

Warranties provide a means to require the contractor to fix products after they have
been accepted. A warranty is an agreement by the contractor that it will be liable
for meeting the contract specifications for a stated period of time after acceptance.
(See FAR 46.7 and 52.246-17 through -20.)


Liquidated damages provide a means for the contractor to compensate the
government for losses that result from contract delays or other problems. The
purpose of liquidated damages clauses and other clauses fixing contractor's
performance responsibilities in the computer security area is to provide incentive for
the contractor to make sure that the product only does what it is intended to do and
nothing more. For example, the product should be free from malicious code. This
is done by having the contractor pay for damages that result from poor security.

Since the goal is to acquire secure systems, the extent of the liquidated damages



                                              51
clause (or other such clause) should be commensurate with the anticipated risks and
damage to the government. A specific maximum dollar value can be placed on the
damages or other means can be used to limit the contractor's liability.

Note:  These are not penalties. If a security violation occurs, but does not result in
any loss, the contractor is not responsible for any liability or liquidated damage.

The following are examples of integrity statements which may be modified to form
a warranty, guarantee, or liquidated damage clause. The examples are not intended
to be used together and should be modified for the operating environment. There
are no examples of customized enforcement clauses (the specific warranty, guarantee,
or liquidated damage) because they must be developed with the contracting officer
and legal counsel. FAR 52.246-17 through -20 contain FAR standard warranties.


1.      The subject product performs in accordance with all
        specifications, certifications, and representations reflected
        in the documentation provided in Addendum 1 except as reflected
        below:




2.      The installation instructions provided with the subject product
        if properly followed shall result in the creation and
        modification of only those objects listed below:




3.      The subject product (hardware or software) shall not interact
        with any other component (hardware, software, or firmware) of
        the system onto which it is being installed to perform any
        function not described in the documentation listed below:




4.      The instructions provided for removing the subject product from
        any system onto which it has been properly installed, shall, if
        properly followed, release back to the system every object used
        to store the subject product on the system.

                                          52
5.     Other than the exceptions listed below, the subject product
       contains no undocumented functions and no undocumented methods
       for gaining access to this software or to the computer system
       on which it is installed.  This includes, but is not limited
       to, master access keys, back doors, or trapdoors.




6.     The subject product does not interfere or bypass the system
       security software [insert name(s) of security software]. The
       program code only performs request validation checking and
       enforces the action that the system security software indicates
       should be taken. This processing is done for all users. Any
       exceptions are listed below.




Government patents and ownership of developed software and systems are another
important considerations that should be discussed with the contracting officer and
legal staff.




                                          53
                      F.    Administration, End of Task, Closeout



One issue for contract closeout is the return or destruction of government
data/information.  Since information can be easily copied, the return of originals
does not fully address the destruction of the information. This issue only needs to
be addressed when the government is having information processed on a contractor
          computer. Be sure that official agency records or information is not
facility or
destroyed before a copy of the information has been received by the agency (if
needed).

The contractor certifies that the data processed during the
performance of this contract shall be purged from all data storage
components of its computer facility, and no output will be retained
by the contractor after such time as the contract is completed.   If
immediate purging of all data storage components is not possible,
the contractor certifies that any agency data remaining in any
storage component will be safeguarded to prevent unauthorized
disclosures.   (Insert schedule.)

Government furnished equipment (GFE) including hardware and software should be
returned in accordance with normal procedures.Special computer security
considerations include the return of the GFE in usable condition.   This is especially
important if a system is going to continue operation under the government's or
another contractor's control. The computer security can be transferred by having
passwords reset by the government or by having the contractor turn in the
passwords. The delineation of security responsibilities during transition should be
addressed. No specific language is provided because of the diversity and
individuality of systems.


Returned software shall be certified to be in its original form.

Another item to be considered is computer accounts on government-owned systems.
Accounts no longer needed by the contractor should be terminated to protect
government resources, i.e., computer time, and to prevent malicious activity by
unauthorized users.

When an employee no longer requires access to the system (if the
employee leaves the company or the contract), the contractor shall
notify the COTR within             working days. At contract
completion or termination, the contractor shall provide a status
list of all users and note if any users still require access to the
system to perform work under another contract. Any group accounts
or other means of gaining access to the system shall be listed also.
This includes maintenance accounts and security bypasses.



                                           54
If a user is fired or leaves the contract or company under adverse
conditions, the contractor shall notify the COTR before the employee
is removed.  If the removal is unplanned, the contractor shall
notify the COTR immediately after dismissing the employee. This
will allow the government to terminate his/her access.

When an employee leaves a contract and at contract closeout, it is important to
dispose of computer files as well as accounts.        Often only the person who
created/used the files has sufficient knowledge to dispose of them.      If the contractor
will be handling official agency records, be sure disposition is made in accordance
with agency records management instructions.

When an employee leaves the contract, the contractor project manager
shall ensure that all files are disposed of by transfer to another
user, archive, destruction, etc.  The contractor project manager
shall report (or certify) disposition in (time frame such as in a
monthly report or within      weeks of the employee leaving.)

For complex contracts that include the development, implementation, or operation of
a computer facility or application, a security working group can be used effectively
to help maintain computer security. The group can be composed of a combination
of government and contractor personnel. Depending on the operational environment,
the group can be used for:


      information exchange;
      configuration management;
      certification    and accreditation issues;
      analyzing security requirements;
      identifying     new threats and vulnerabilities;
      identifying changes to the system that impact security;
      recommending solutions to security problems as they occur; and
      making recommendations based on tradeoffs between security and other
      functional requirements.


The following examples define a security working group used to support an
operational system.

The contractor shall provide (number and type of) personnel for a
security control /review group. This group will address security
problems, help provide for the maintenance of accreditation or
certification under the control of (government person responsible
for computer security of system)  report security problems, and make
                                             ,


security recommendations.

The contractor can be responsible for the administration and support of the group.


                                                 55
The contractor shall schedule meetings monthly (or other time
frame), arrange for (or provide) a room, and take minutes.  The
minutes will be submitted to the COTR/GTR within one calendar week
after the meeting.  The meetings shall commence one month (or other
time frame) after contract award and continue throughout the period
of performance (or other ending time)




                                 56
                  G.   Computer Security Training and Awareness


An important goal of the Computer Security Act is to have all personnel involved in
the management, use, and operation of federal systems trained in computer security
awareness and accepted computer security practices.          OMB Circular A- 130,
Appendix HI, specifically requires that contractor personnel involved in the
management, operation, programming, maintenance, or use of federal systems be
aware of their security responsibilities and how to fulfill them.

The following can be used in the cases where the agency determines that NIST
Special Publication 500-172 "Computer Security Training Guidelines" adequately
addresses the security training requirement for the contractor.      This can be tailored
to include specific additional skills, training levels, or
                                                        audience categories depending
on the requirements of the agency. A time frame should be specified for when the
contractor personnel must have received the training. The development of training
certifications should be discussed with the contracting officer.


The contractor shall, at a minimum, certify that all contractor
personnel involved in the management, use, and operation of (name
of) system (s) who perform work under the subject effort shall have
received training appropriate to their assignment as defined in NIST
Special Publication 500-172 "Computer Security Training Guidelines."

Each individual (or category of contractor personnel) proposed for
the effort shall be identified with appropriate audience
category(s), as defined in NIST Special Publication 500-172, pages
3-4.   The contractor shall certify each as having received computer
security training appropriate to their categories, as denoted in the
training matrix on page 6 of 500-172 and described in pages 8-27.

Additional /refresher training shall be performed          (time
period)  . Certification of this training shall be provided to the
contracting officer no later than        calendar days after the
training has occurred.

The following are examples of tailoring the training specification.

In addition, all contractor personnel involved in the administration
of the access control package shall have received training on the
package equivalent to      hours of classroom instruction or
hours of job experience using the package.

The contractor system security personnel shall have received
training in the operations of the system that includes a systemic
overview, the security features, known vulnerabilities and threats,
and security evaluation methodologies.

                                             57
The following can be used when the acquisition agency has specific training
minimums that are available to the prospective offerors. The second paragraph may
be added as an Instruction to Offerors.

The contractor shall, at a minimum, certify that any personnel who
perform work under the subject effort shall have received security
awareness and skills training that is equivalent to that received by
government personnel at (fill in location).

It is the responsibility of the prospective offeror to obtain the
agency guidelines for this training prior to the submission of a
proposal under this solicitation at (fill in address and point of
contact)  .(Alternate:  The agency guidelines can be included as an
attachment to the RFP     .




                                          58
                                H.    Personnel Security



Requiring vetting, or personnel screening, of contractor or subcontractor employees
as a condition for access to government resources is a recommended safeguard. The
type of access can be physical or computer systems access. The level of vetting
should be based on an assessment of risk, cost, benefit, and feasibility. Vetting
includes a range of implementations from minimal checks to full background
investigations. The extent of screening is dependent on the sensitivity of the system
or data and the implementation of other administrative, technical, and physical
safeguards.


Be sure to include in the contract:

       what types of investigations are required for what types of access;
       who will review the investigation to determine access privileges;
       who is paying for the investigations;
       whether the investigations must be reviewed before access is granted;
       when names and supporting information must be submitted;
       what other types of clearances (from other government agencies) can be
       substituted; and
       how investigations or results will be reported on or certified to the contracting
       officer.


Different vetting could also be required for different types or levels of access.
There are many kinds of investigations. OPM Federal Personnel Manual Chapter
736 Subchapter 3 describes some investigations as they pertain to government
investigations. The list below includes those and other forms of investigations:


       Review of the employment forms completed by the individual;
       Personal reference check;
       Credit check;
       Verification of employment for the last 2 years prior to current employment;
       Verification of education (high school or beyond) within the last 5 years that
       resulted in the awarding of a degree;
       Local police check in present county and state;
       National criminal check by private agency;
       National Agency Check (NAC);
       National Agency Check and Inquiries (NACI);
       Minimum Background Investigation (MBI);
       Limited Background Investigation (LBI);
       Background Investigation (BI); and




                                           59
         Special Background Investigation (SBI) that includes verification of all
         previous places of employment and residence for a several year period (e.g.,
         15 years).


Access to the government's resources is a privilege and should be revoked if an
individual   becomes a threat to the system.

The government may remove access privileges for contractor personnel
for unauthorized, negligent, or willful actions.  These may include,
but are not limited to:

         exploration of the system;
         introduction of malicious software;
         unauthorized modification or disclosure of the system or data;
         and
         failure to logoff.

There are other types of personnel security methods besides investigations such as
employee statements regarding conflict of interest. Conflict of interest can include
procurement integrity certifications, financial disclosure, or reports on outside
activity. Be sure to specify what is required, when the form(s) must be completed
and what access decision(s) are based on the form.

If the   agency has a computer systems user agreement that states user computer
security responsibilities (such as safeguarding passwords),   it is   appropriate to require
contractor personnel sign the agreement before computer systems access is granted.
The following clause can be modified to be more stringent (such as agency receipt
of agreement before access in granted).

The contractor shall insure that all contractor personnel sign the
user agreement (sample attached in Section J of RFP) prior to having
access to agency systems.

Care must be taken when addressing the area of contractor personnel. The
government cannot engage in personal services contracts unless specifically
authorized by statute. Personal services contracts are those where the government
has an employer-employee relationship with contractor staff. See Part 37 of the
FAR "Service Contracting." Requiring contractor personnel to be vetted as a
condition for employment under the contract suggests an employer-employee
relationship.  However, requiring vetting of contractors as a condition for access to
government resources is different. It does not imply an employer-employee
relationship since the government has a responsibility to retain control of its
resources.




                                            60
While the distinction above may seem minor, it can be essential during a contract.
It is   important that the distinction is understood to avoid personal services contracts
while protecting government resources.




                                              61
                                I.   Physical Security



The following types of clauses can be used for contracts where work will be
performed at the contractor location.

Physical security for computer systems helps prevent theft, tampering, and
destruction.


The contractor shall provide physical security for (list components
or systems) other than those in agency controlled space and for
information being transmitted across (list networks).  Physical
security measures to be implemented include protecting the:

       site (e.g., access to computer room);
       hardware (e.g., communications processors, modems); and
       software and data.

The contractor shall identify (name of system or components)
equipment that will be in nonagency controlled areas. Methods for
physically protecting these systems shall be provided by the
Contractor.  The protection shall be against damage, unauthorized
access, alteration, modification and destruction, whether by act of
nature, accident, or intrusion.

Computer security should be considered as an issue for preaward site surveys. In
general, computer security should be integrated into existing agency clauses for
preaward site surveys instead of using this clause.

When it is determined that a preaward site survey is necessary in
order to verify that the security of a facility is adequate, the
contracting officer shall notify the offeror that such a survey will
be necessary and coordinate with the offeror as necessary.   No
contract for services or supplies will be awarded until the survey
is completed.  The recommendations of the (office performing
survey), as appropriate, will be a significant factor in the
determination of responsibility.




                                          62
                     J.    Computer Security Features in Systems


Computer security features in systems refer to specific functions to be incorporated
or bought with applications, operating systems, and hardware. How security features
are incorporated is dependent on the function and environment of the system.


For many systems, a combination of features will be used, some of which are
incorporated in the operating system and some in the application. For example,
additional access controls at a finer level of granularity (record or field) and edit
checks are commonly incorporated at the application level, while file access may
still be performed by the operating system. Many other security architectures are
possible.  Whatever security architecture is selected, it is imperative that the security
features work together in the system environment and that the documentation and
testing address the coordinated approach.


This section addresses several controls that are normally associated with operating
systems but can be provided by an application. Additional application-oriented
controls are described in FIPS PUB 73 Guidelines for Security of Computer
Applications.


The features described in this section are a combination of basic security controls
and some advanced controls. The controls are described in functional specifications.
Individual tailoring to specific environments will probably be required.         If the
intention of the procurement is to acquire off-the-shelf products, market surveys
should be performed to determine what features are currently commercially available.
Modifying security features of off-the-shelf products can be expensive. (Market
surveys should be performed in accordance with agency policy.)


This section, like the other sections in this guidelines, is a list of possible features,
procedures, and assurances. Additional information on the uses of these features can
be obtained from agency security officials and NIST and other publications.               NIST
Publication List 91, which is periodically updated, catalogues the NIST computer
security publications.    Technical terms and concepts are explained in the glossary.


Note:  The term "system" is used loosely to mean any collection of components,
hardware, software, firmware, processes, etc. The use of a more specific term is
recommended. Terms such as "the offeror's solution" for integration efforts, "the
product" for a component buy, "application system," "operating system," or specific
references to parts of the system architecture,   i.e.,   "trusted   computing base," are a
few examples.




                                            63
Note:   The controls are consistent with those specified in DoD's 5200.28-STD.     See
NCSL Bulletin Guidance to Federal Agencies on the Use of Trusted Systems
Technology.



J.l.    Identification   and Authentication Specifications

Identification and authentication are basic building blocks of security features in
systems. For many systems, every user initiated activity within the computer system
(e.g., accessing or printing a file, sending a message) should be attributable to a user

of the system. The identification is normally performed when the user logs on to
the system, whether through an interactive terminal, or through some other
mechanism (e.g., using a batch job, through a network connection). User
authentication is normally performed by use of a password. However, there are
many methods of authentication. To enforce accountability and access control, all
users must identify and authenticate themselves to the system.

The system shall include a mechanism to require users to uniquely
identify themselves to the system before beginning to perform any
other actions that the system is expected to mediate.  Furthermore,
the system shall be able to maintain authentication data that
includes information for verifying the identity of individual users
(e.g., passwords).  The system shall protect authentication data so
that it cannot be accessed by any unauthorized user.  The system
shall be able to enforce individual accountability by providing  the
capability to uniquely identify each individual computer system
user.  The system shall also provide the capability of associating
this identity with all auditable actions taken by that individual.
The system shall be able to maintain information for determining the
authorizations of individual users.

The type of user authentication mechanism may need to be specified. The most
common type of authentication is passwords. NIST FIPS PUB 112 Standard on
Password Usage is a mandatory standard. In addition, DoD CSC-STD-00-85
Password Management Guideline contains further information on passwords.

There are several other types of authentication mechanisms. User authentication can
be based on three categories of information: something the user knows, such as a
password; something the user possesses, such as a token; and some physical
characteristic (biometric) of the user, such as a fingerprint. Authentication methods
employing a token or biometric can provide a significantly higher level of security
than passwords alone. These systems are referred to as advanced authentication
technology. In addition, cryptography is often incorporated into advanced
authentication systems especially in network applications. NIST will be providing
guidance on advanced authentication.


                                            64
J.2.     Discretionary Access Control Specifications

Computer systems access control is the mechanism used to specify "who" (subjects)
can do "what" to items controlled by the system or application (objects). The most
common types of access are read, write, modify, execute, and delete. The access
control is said to be discretionary when users on the system can pass access
permissions to other users. This can be done directly or indirectly, such as copying
a file to a public area on the system.


(Note:    The term "access control" is also used to refer to physical controls.   This
section addresses the logical access provided by the computer system.)


The system shall use identification and authorization data to
determine user access to information. The system shall be able to
define and control access between subjects and objects in the
computer system.  The enforcement mechanism (e.g., self /group/
public controls, access control lists) shall allow users to specify
and control sharing of those objects by other users, or defined
groups of users, or by both, and shall provide controls to limit
propagation of access rights. The discretionary access control
mechanism shall, either by explicit user action or by default,
provide that objects are protected from unauthorized access. These
access controls shall be capable of including or excluding access to
the granularity of a single user.  Access permission to an object by
users not already possessing access permission shall only be
assigned by authorized users.

Commercial systems vary significantly with respect to the granularity of objects to
which discretionary access control is applied. Generally, operating systems are
organized to provide discretionary access control at the file level.   In order to
provide access control within an application, the government must specify the types
of objects, such as data elements, that are subject to the access control.


If system being acquired is to be delivered with access controls established, then the
government must provide a security policy, definition of data objects, and list of
access classes, access types, and accesses (who can do what) to the data objects.



J.3.     Audit Specifications

Auditing provides protection in the sense that all meaningful actions within the
system may be recorded and some user held accountable for each action. Auditing
can occur at the operating system level or within a database or application.      The


                                            65
recorded audit data can assist the system security officer in determining who is
responsible for a problem or how a problem was caused.         Audit data can be used to
deter users from attempting to exceed their authorizations and to achieve individual
accountability.       The key to accountability in computer and network systems is the
recording and analysis of effective audit trail information.


Some system designers provide for the auditing of an event with mechanisms that
cannot be turned off by the operator, or system security officer. Other system
designers supply audit capabilities that can be turned on or off at the discretion of
the operator or security officer, thus allowing each local site to "tune"   its   auditing.
There are a number of tradeoffs that must be made in deciding what is to be
audited and how often.


The government is responsible for selecting which events have the potential to be
audited and, after system acquisition, which events are recorded in the audit trail.
The government must also specify how long audit information is to be retained and
on what media.         These decisions should be based on how the audit data will be
used.


The following is a three-part specification for auditing which should be modified for
the type of system being procured. The first part of the specification defines the
auditing function      itself.


The system shall be able to create, maintain, and protect from
modification or unauthorized access or destruction an audit trail of
accesses to the objects it protects   The audit data shall be
protected so that read access to it is limited to those who are
authorized.

The second part of this specification lists what types of events need to be auditable.
This list should be modified to include security events relevant to the system
function and environment.

The system shall be able to record the following types of events:
use of identification and authentication mechanisms, introduction of
objects into a user's address space (e.g., file open, program
initiation)  deletion of objects, and actions taken by computer
                  ,



operators and system administrators and/or system security officers
and other security relevant events.  The system shall also be able
to audit any override of human-readable output markings.

The third part of this audit specification is a description of the audit record.

For each recorded event, the audit record shall be able to identify:
date and time of the event, user, type of event, and success or
failure of the event.  For identification/ authentication events the

                                              66
origin of request (e.g., terminal ID) shall be included in the audit
record.  For events that introduce an object into a user's address
space and for object deletion events, the audit record shall include
the name of the object and the object's label.  The system
administrator shall be able to selectively audit the actions of any
one or more users based on individual identity and/or object label.


J.4.   Cryptography Specifications

The following subsections address some of the ways cryptography can be used to
provide computer security services in systems and some of the considerations for
using cryptography.


Cryptography can be used to provide confidentiality and integrity protection and can
be used in the generation of electronic signatures. Confidentiality of information can
be provided through encryption, which is the process of transforming information
from a human intelligible form to an unintelligible form. Integrity can be provided
through message authentication, which is a cryptographic process used to detect
unauthorized changes to information (transmitted or stored) in a computer system.
An electronic (cryptographic) signature is used as a replacement for a handwritten
signature.


Cryptography can be categorized as either secret key or public key. Secret key
cryptography is based on the use of a single cryptographic key shared between two
parties. The same key is used to encrypt and decrypt the data. Public key
cryptography uses two keys: a private key which is known only to its owner and a
public key which is distributed. Either the public or private key can be used to
encrypt the data and the opposite key is used to decrypt it.


Choosing which type of cryptography should be implemented in a system is
determined by several factors. An agency should consider the requirements of the
application and the types of services which can be provided by each type of
cryptography. It is possible that both secret key and public key cryptography are
needed in one system; each performing different functions.

This section addresses three services provided by cryptography; encryption, data
authentication, and electronic signatures; and two areas that must be considered for
any system using cryptography: key management and security of cryptographic
modules.




                                          67
J.4.a.   Encryption

If encryption   of sensitive but unclassified information (except Warner Amendment
information) is needed in a federal information processing system the use of the
Data Encryption Standard (DES), FIPS 46-1, is required unless a waiver is granted
by the head of the federal agency. The NCSL Bulletin on DES dated June 1990
provides an overview of DES, addresses its applicability, and describes waiver
procedures. Procurement initiators should be aware that software implementations of
the algorithm for operational use in general purpose computer systems currently do
not comply with the standard, and, if used, a waiver is required.


NIST provides a validation service for DES.    A validation is required for
conformance with the standard. See section 4.f below and Appendix B for further
information on validations and assurances, including contract language.

The encryption provided by (the system or specific part of the
system as defined in the statement of work) shall be accomplished in
accordance with FIPS 46-1 Data Encryption Standard.   (Select
validation language from Appendix B.)

In addition to specifying the cryptographic implementation, agencies should consider
other technical variables such as throughput, system interfaces, and data format.
While DES can work in any environment, the product that implements the DES may
have been customized for a particular environment.

Other important aspects of DES, such as key management and the security of the
modules, are addressed in sections 4.d and 4.e.



J.4.b.   Data Authentication

DES is the basis for the Data Authentication Algorithm defined in FIPS 113,
Computer Data Authentication.   The FIPS 113 provides integrity for information
using a cryptographic check value known as the Message Authentication Code
(MAC). Applying the DES algorithm, a MAC is calculated on and appended to
information. To verify that the information has not been modified at some later
time, the MAC is recalculated on the information. The new MAC is compared with
the MAC that was previously generated and if they are equal then the information
has not been altered.  This standard should be used by agencies whenever
cryptographic authentication is needed for the detection of intentional modification of
information.


Note:  FIPS 113 may be implemented in hardware, software, firmware, or any
combination thereof.


                                          68
NIST provides a validation service for FIPS 113. Agencies may require that
offerors have products tested. For many applications, validation testing can provide
cost-effective assurance. See section 4.f below and Appendix B for further
information on validations and contract language.

The data/message authentication provided by (the system or specific
part of the system as defined in the statement of work) shall be
accomplished using message authentication codes as defined by FIPS
113.  (Select validation language from Appendix B.)


J.4.c.   Electronic Signature


Using cryptography, an electronic signature capability has been developed as a
replacement of the handwritten signature. This capability can be used in ADP
systems anywhere a signature is required. For example, a signature may be needed
on an electronic letter, form, or message. Like the handwritten signature, the
electronic signature can be used to identify the originator or signer of ADP
information. Unlike its written counterpart, it also verifies that information has not
been altered after it was electronically signed.

An electronic signature can be generated using public key or secret key
cryptography.    Using a public key system, documents in a computer system are
electronically signed  by applying the originator's private key to the document. The
resulting digital signature and document are usually stored or transmitted together.
The signature can be verified using the public key of the signer. If the signature
verifies properly, the receiver has confidence that the document was signed by the
owner of the public key and that the message has not been altered after it was
signed. Because private keys are known only to their owner, it is also possible to
verify the signer of the information to any third party. A digital signature,
therefore, provides two distinct security services: nonrepudiation and message
integrity.  Identifying that electronic information was actually signed by the claimed
originator to a third party provides nonrepudiation. Determining that information
was not altered after it was signed provides message integrity.     NIST currently has
a draft Digital Signature Standard (DSS), which has not yet been assigned a FIPS
number.

NIST is planning on providing a validation service for the DSS. A validation will
be required for conformance with the standard after NIST establishes the validation
program. See section 4.f below and Appendix B for further information on
validations and assurances, including contract language.


The following contract clause should not be used until the draft FIPS is finalized.


                                          69
The public key-based digital signature capability provided by (the
system or specific part of the system as defined in the statement of
work) shall be accomplished in accordance with the Digital Signature
Standard (insert FIPS number).  (Select validation language from
Appendix B     .




Using DES, a secret key algorithm, a   MAC (a cryptographic check value) can be
used to provide an electronic signature capability. Calculating a MAC on
information in an   ADP system provides message integrity as described in section 4.b
above.     A MAC can be used to identify the signer of information to the receiver.
However, the implementations of this technology do not inherently provide
nonrepudiation because both the sender of the information and the receiver of
information share the same key.

The electronic signature capability provided by (the system or
specific part of the system as defined in the statement of work)
shall be accomplished in accordance with FIPS 113.  (Select
validation language from Appendix B.)


J.4.d.   Key Management

Key management is extremely important because the security of any cryptographic
system is dependent on the security provided to the cryptographic keys. In order for
a cryptographic system to work effectively, keys must be generated, distributed,
used, and destroyed securely. Key management is an issue in both secret key
systems, such as DES, and public key systems. This section addresses secret key
systems.


NIST has developed a draft FIPS PUB for the management of cryptographic keying
material utilizing the Data Encryption Standard.   (A FIPS number has not yet been
assigned.) The draft FIPS PUB adopts ANSI X9.17 and specifies a particular
selection of options for the automated distribution of keying material by the Federal
Government. This standard must be used by Federal agencies when designing,
acquiring, implementing and managing keying material which use DES and ANSI
X9.17. Other key management systems may be approved by NIST for federal
government use in the future.

NIST provides a validation service for selected options of ANSI X9.17 and is
developing services for the new FIPS. Agencies may require that offerors have
products tested. For many applications, validation testing can provide cost-effective
assurance. See section 4.f below and Appendix B for further information on
validations and assurances, including contract language.




                                           70
                                                 .




The following contract clause should not be used until the draft FIPS is finalized.
Make sure that the validation section of the clause only specifies options for which
NIST is currently providing validation services.

The key management provided by (the system or specific part of the
system as defined in the statement of work) shall be accomplished in
accordance with (insert FIPS number)

Key management can be a complex issue for large or diverse systems.         Be sure to
request a key management system that meets the system's specific needs.



J.4.e.   Security of Cryptographic Modules


The security of cryptographic modules refers to the secure design, implementation
and use of a cryptographic module. The security of cryptographic modules is
important because cryptography is often relied on as the exclusive means of
protecting data when the data is outside the control of the system. The protection
of the data is, therefore, reliant on the correct operation of the cryptographic
module.      The knowledge that a module is operating correctly is referred to as
assurance.     Appendix B and section III.B.l.b further discuss assurance.

Proposed FIPS PUB 140-1 Security Requirements for Cryptographic Standards
establishes the physical and logical security requirements for the design and
manufacture of cryptographic modules used to protect sensitive unclassified
information. Note: FIPS 140-1 can be used to provide assurance for DES and
other NIST-approved cryptographic algorithms, such as the public key algorithm
used in the digital signature standard.

FIPS 140-1 defines four levels of security, with Level 1 being the lowest and Level
4 being the highest. Based on the level of assurance analysis performed during the
security requirements phase (sec. III.B.l.b), an appropriate FIPS 140-1 level should
be identified. NIST may provide additional information which will help agencies
identify the appropriate level.   The identification of the security level should be
specified in the procurement package.


FIPS 140-1 will replace FIPS 140, General Security Requirements for Equipment
Using the Data Encryption Standard (formerly Federal Standard 1027). Currently
agencies must require conformance with FIPS 140 (or obtain a waiver) if
cryptography is used to protect sensitive unclassified information. Since testing is
no longer available for FIPS 140, agencies cannot require validation testing. Instead,
agencies should require an offeror's declaration of FIPS 140 conformance or, if
available, an NSA endorsement. After FIPS 140-1 becomes a standard, agencies
should continue to require a declaration of conformance until NIST establishes the


                                            71
validation service.    Only then can agencies require FIPS 140-1   validations.   The
CSL Bulletin, "FIPS 140     -   A Standard In Transition," dated April 1991, provides
additional information on the standard and the waiver procedure.


When FIPS 140-1 becomes a standard and NIST has established the validation
program, the following clause can be used. A validation will be required for
conformance with the standard. See section 4.f below and Appendix B for further
information on validations and assurances, including contract language. These
clauses should not be used until FIPS 140-1 is finalized.

The design, implementation, and use of the cryptographic module
provided by (the system or specific part of the system as defined in
the statement of work) shall be in conformance with FIPS 140-1,
Level (insert level).   (Select validation language from Appendix B.)


J.4.f.   Validations

NIST currently provides validation services for FIPS 46-1, FIPS 113, and selected
options of ANSI X9.17. After an implementation is validated, NIST issues a
validation certificate and adds the implementation to a Validation List.    (Lists for
validated implementations are available by contacting     NIST or through their
electronic bulletin board service, 301-948-5717 or from the NIST Validated Products
List, updated quarterly.)  Manufacturers, integrators, and offerors may purchase
validated implementations and use them in their own products. As long as the
validated implementation has not been altered, a second validation is not performed.
Therefore, the product containing the validated implementation would not be on the
validation list; however, the offeror should be able to identify the validated
implementation used in the product or supply a copy of the original validation
certificate.


See Appendix B for more information on validations and assurance. Appendix B
specifically addresses options for validation testing and provides contract language.




Other Sources

NIST has other standards and guidelines that relate to cryptography. A list of NIST
           is available from NIST Publications List 91.
publications                                               For ordering information,
see the inside back cover of this document.




                                             72
J.5.   Object Reuse Specifications

When a system resource (memory or storage) is reused, there is a possibility that the
new user can view "residual information" left in the resource by the previous user.
The purpose of object reuse specifications is to prevent the inadvertent disclosure of
residual information. Since object reuse may impact system performance, care
should be taken in selecting and testing object reuse.

The system shall be able to ensure that all authorizations to the
information contained within an object are revoked prior to initial
assignment, allocation or reallocation to a subject from the
system's pool of unused objects. The system shall be able to ensure
that no information, including encrypted representations of
information, produced by a prior subject's actions is available to
any subject that obtains access to an object that has been released
back to the system.

Object reuse specifications can be achieved either by clearing objects upon allocation
or upon deallocation. A third method involves establishing a "high water mark"
sensitivity of the object, allocating   it   only to processes of the same sensitivity.
Objects can be cleared by overwriting each bit in the object.          The minimum
number of overwrites should be specified.



J.6.   System Integrity Specifications

The government can use commercial off-the-shelf diagnostic capability for validating
correctness of the hardware and firmware operations.          Generally speaking such
diagnostic offerings are not valid to verify the correctness of the software
implementation.

Hardware and/or software features shall be provided that can be used
to periodically validate the correct operation of the on-site
hardware and firmware elements of the system.

In addition,   some vendors are using cryptographic techniques to verify the integrity
of their software. These can be used to ensure that software received, or in storage,
is the same as the "master" copy of the software maintained by the vendor.




J.7.   System Architecture Specifications

As described in Appendix B, "Assurance," the use of advanced system architectures
can provide assurance that the security features are correctly and effectively
implemented.


                                                 73
The mechanisms within the application that enforce the access
control shall be continuously protected against tampering and/or
unauthorized changes.

The security-relevant software shall maintain a domain for its own
execution that protects its security mechanisms from external
interference or tampering (e.g., by modification of its code or data
structures)   Resources controlled by the system may be a defined
              .


subset of the subjects and objects in the computer system.  The
system shall maintain process isolation through the provision of
distinct address spaces under its control. The system shall isolate
the resources to be protected so they are controlled by the access
control and auditing requirements.

Note: The word "domain" as used here refers to the protection environment in
which a process is executing. Domain is sometimes also referred to as "context" or
"address space."


The procuring agency should be aware that over specification of the architecture for
a system can preclude integrators from incorporating otherwise valid existing
products.Over specification can also eliminate lower cost alternatives resulting in a
more costly procurement. This over specification is a common problem and
generally proves not to be cost effective.     From a security perspective over
specification can actually preclude adequate information control.




J.8.    Labels and Mandatory Access Control

The following sections address labels and mandatory access control. These are
emerging security features in some off-the-shelf operating systems which may be
appropriate for use in some computing environments. They are not required.


This section presents a brief introduction to and specification language for labels and
mandatory access control. Labels and mandatory access control should not be
acquired or implemented without a thorough knowledge of access control policy,
information flow, and how labels and mandatory access control work. Labels and
mandatory access control can be costly in terms of dollars, ease of use, ease of
administration, and computer resources.


These sections on labels and mandatory access control are addressing only one form
of mandatory access. Other approaches, such as those based on roles, are possible,
section J.9 addresses labels; section J. 10 addresses mandatory access controls. For
additional guidance, the procurement initiator should contact the agency security
official.



                                          74
Labels and mandatory access control are useful when acquiring multi-user computer
systems with a requirement for mandatory separation of sensitive information and for
which security labels can be established. In practical terms, this means labels and
mandatory access control are most useful if the type and degree of sensitivity of the
data can be established, and there is a strong reason for using technical means to
enforce compliance with policy. Labeling and mandatory access control require that
there    is   a clear access control policy that can be enforced.



J.9.      Label Specifications

Labels can be used to have the system manage sensitive objects. A label is a piece
of information that represents information about an object or subject. Labels can be
used for a variety of purposes including access control, specifying protective
measures, and indicating additional handling instructions. This document addresses
using labels for access control.      It   should be modified if the labels will be used for
other purposes. If labels are used for access control, then object labels represent the
degree and type of sensitivity of the data in an object. Subject labels represent the
authorization of users to access degrees and types of sensitive data.

Security labels associated with each subject and storage object
under the system's control (e.g., process, file, segment, device)
shall be maintained by the system.  These labels shall be used as
the basis for access control decisions.   In order to import
nonlabeled data, the system shall be able to request and receive
from an authorized user (e.g., system or application security
administrator) the security label of the data, and all such actions
shall be auditable by the system.

In order to ensure smooth transition in the operating conditions of the system when
changes are necessary, and also for maintenance purposes, it is sometimes necessary
to provide capabilities that allow the security labels of objects to      be altered under
carefully controlled conditions.


The system shall ensure that any feature that changes security
labels is only invocable by an authorized individual under the
direct control of the system, or by a part of the system, and that
these actions are subject to auditing requirements.


J.9.a.        Label Integrity Specifications

The following specification addresses integrity requirements for labels.        Depending
on system architecture, it is not essential that a label be maintained with the data.


                                                 75
It ispermissible to associate the label with the data. Some operating systems
maintain the label inside the operating system and store the data separately.

Security labels shall accurately represent the degree and type of
sensitivity of the specific subjects or objects with which they are
associated.  Throughout the system, security labels shall accurately
and unambiguously represent and be associated with the information
being managed.


J.9.b.     Labels and Input/Output Specifications

Since all systems receive input (import data) and produce output (export data), the
system designer must address the problem of what to do with labels at system
boundaries. How is incoming data labeled? How is outgoing data labeled? The
input and output can be in electronic, paper, or other form.

The system shall be able to designate each communication channel and
I/O device as either single-label or multi-label.  Any change in
this designation shall be done by a properly authorized individual
and shall be audi table by the system. The system shall maintain and
be able to audit any change in the security label or labels
associated with a communication channel or I/O device.

The Phrase "Properly Authorized" is understood to be the System Administrator and
Security Officer or their designees.



J.9.b(l)    Multi-Label Communications

When information contained in an object is exported from the system, a means must
be provided for the system to accurately and unambiguously associate the security
label of the object with the information being exported. The Phrase "exported by
the system" is understood to include transmission of information from an object in
one system to an object in another system. The form of internal security labels may
differ from their external (exported) form, but the meaning must be retained. This
association is critical on multi-label channels because the receiver will use the
provided label both for processing and access decisions.

When the system exports an object to a multi-label I/O device, the
security label associated with that object shall also be exported
and shall reside on the same physical medium as the exported
information and shall be in the same form (i.e., machine-readable or
human-readable form)   When the system exports or imports an object
                           .



over a multi-label communication channel, the protocol used on that
channel shall provide for the unambiguous pairing between the


                                          76
           .




security labels and the associated information that is sent or
received


J.9.b(2)   Single-Label Communications

Two types of single label designations are possible. One type can be applied to a
channel or device by a Security Administrator. The second type can be applied by
an authorized user (e.g., application security administrator) who can designate which
label, within a range, is to be applied to the subsequent data/object. Thus a device
or channel may be multiple consecutive single labels; but the system must
communicate with an authorized user prior to each label designation change.

Single-label I/O devices and single-label communication channels are
not required to maintain the security labels of the information they
process.  However, the system shall include a mechanism by which the
system and an authorized user (e.g., application security
administrator) reliably communicate to designate the single security
label of information imported or exported via single-label
communication channels or I/O devices.


J.9.b(3)   Labeling Output

The following specifications address exporting data to a different environment, for
example, from the internal system environment to the office environment or a
networked environment.

Prior to releasing an object to an environment where accesses are no
longer mediated by the system, the system must associate the object
with an external label that is comprehensible to the new
environment.  The external label must accurately represent the
security label of the object as assigned by the system.

One of the most common examples of moving a label into a new environment is
labeling human-readable output, specifically printouts. The following specification is
an example of how the system can label printouts.

The system administrator shall be able to specify the printable
label names associated with exported security labels.   The system
shall mark the beginning and end of all human-readable, paged,
hardcopy output (e.g., line printer output) with human-readable
security labels that properly represent the overall sensitivity of
the output.  The system shall, by default, mark the top and bottom
of each page of human-readable, paged, hardcopy output (e.g., line
printer output) with human- readable security labels that properly
represent the overall sensitivity of the output or that properly

                                          77
represent the sensitivity of the information on the page.  The
system shall, by default and in an appropriate manner, mark other
forms of human-readable output (e.g., maps, graphics) with
human-readable security labels that properly represent the
sensitivity of the output. Any override of these marking defaults
shall be auditable by the system.

The system administrator is usually the "user" designated to specify the printed or
displayed security label that is to be associated with exported information.



J.10.   Mandatory Access Control Specifications

As stated in section 2, access control is the mechanism used to specify "who" can
do "what" to items controlled by the system. The most common types of access are
read, write, modify, execute, and delete. The access control is said to be mandatory
when the system mediates access based on subject and object labels. This prevents
users from accidentally or deliberately violating the access control policy.

The system shall be able to enforce a mandatory access control
policy over all subjects and storage objects (e.g., processes,
files, segments, devices)   These subjects and objects shall be
                                .



assigned security labels and shall be used as the basis for
mandatory access control decisions. The system shall be able to
support two or more such labels.  The following requirements shall
hold for all accesses between subjects and objects controlled by the
system

        A subject can read an object only if the hierarchical attribute
        in the subject's label is greater than or equal to the
        hierarchical attribute in the object's label and the
        nonhierarchical attribute in the subject's label include all
        the nonhierarchical attributes in the object's label.

        A subject can write an object only if the hierarchical
        attribute in the subject's label is less than or equal to the
        hierarchical attribute in the object's label and all the
        nonhierarchical attributes in the subject's label are included
        in the nonhierarchical labels in the object's label.

        Identification shall be used by the system to ensure that the
        authorization of subjects created to act on behalf of the
        individual user are a subset of the authorization of that user.




                                           78
                                                                           Appendix A


                 Uniform Contract Format for Federal Government
                          Requests For Proposals (RFP)

RFP Section                 Contents                        Created By Technical
                                                            and/or Procurement


                                                            Comments

A. Solicitation/Contract    Cover Sheet For RFP, with       Procurement
       Form                 Solicitation Number,
                            Type of Solicitation,           Contains standard RFP
                            Due Date,                       information
                            Procurement Contact
                            Point, etc. (SF33)


B.   Supplies or Services   List of Products/Services       Procurement
       and Prices/Costs     to   Be Provided by Offeror
                                                            Developed from other
                                                            portions of RFP.
                                                            Contains standard RFP
                                                            information.


C.   Description/           Defines Scope of Contract       Technical   & Procurement
       Specifications/      and Requirements Including:
       Work Statement       Mandatory Specifications,       Describes product/services
                            Optional Features Services      to   be procured.
                            Specification may be included
                            as an Attachment/Section J


D.   Packaging and          Shipping, Handling, and         Procurement & Technical
       Marking              Storage Requirements.
                            May Not Be Required For         Standard RFP information
                            Service Contracts.              with special technical
                                                            requirements if necessary.


E.   Inspection and         Standards of Performance,       Procurement & Technical
       Acceptance           Reliability Requirements,
                            Acceptance, Benchmarks,         Determines how product
                            Inspection, Quality Assurance   or service is to be
                                                            accepted and must



                                            79
                                                         perform.   Contains
                                                         standard RFP information
                                                         with specific technical
                                                         requirements.


     Deliveries or       Time, Place, and Method of      Procurement & Technical
        Performance      Deliverables/Performance.
                         Describes such things as:       Contains standard RFP
                         Liquidated Damages,             information with special
                         Equipment Replacement,          technical requirements.
                         Field Modifications,
                         Alternations, Maintenance
                         Response Time and Down Time
                         Credits, Product Replacement,
                         Variation in Quantity,
                         Delivery and Installation
                         Schedule, Stop Work Orders,
                         Etc.


G.   Contract            Contract Administration such    Procurement & usually
        Administration   as:                             Technical
        Data             Authorities of Government
                         Personnel, Required Reports,    Normally standard RFP
                         Holidays, Use of Government     information with special
                         Property, Financial             technical requirements.
                         Information


H.   Special Contract    Clauses Other Than Those        Procurement & Technical
        Requirements     Required By Law/Regulations
                         Including:                      Normally standard RFP
                         Warranties, Replacement         information with special
                         Parts,Engineering Changes       technical requirements.
                         Recording Devices,
                         Hardware/Software Monitors,
                         Site Preparation, Financial
                         Reporting, Transition
                         Requirements, Handling of
                         Data, Security, Etc.


I.   Contract Clauses    Clauses Required By Law/        Procurement
                         Regulations not Otherwise
                         Required for a Particular       Contains standard RFP
                         Section.                        information



                                         80
                                                        .




J.   List of Attachments        Any Additional Procurement    Procurement & Technical
                                and Technical Information
                                For Offeror.

K.   Representations,           All Statements Required of    Procurement
        Certifications,   and   the Offeror by Law/
        Other Statements        Regulation/Agency             Standard RFP information
        of Offerors
                                Offeror Must Complete and
                                Return with proposal.


L.   Instructions,              Requirements for Proposals.   Procurement & Technical
        Conditions, and         Specifies the Plans,
        Notices to Offerors Approaches, References, and       Addresses how offeror
                                Other Information the         should respond to
                                Offeror Must Submit for       statement of work as set
                                                              out in the evaluation
                                Proposal Evaluation.          criteria.
                                Requires Offeror To Tell
                                How They Will/Can Meet The
                                Requirements Described In
                                Section C.


M.    Evaluation Factors        Describes How Proposals       Procurement & Technical
        For Award               Will Be Evaluated and the
                                criteria against   which
                                proposal will be evaluated.
                                Also Describes how a Source
                                will be selected.




For further information, see FAR 15.406.




                                                   81
                                                                           Appendix B

                                            Assurance



There are many methods of attaining assurance that the security features work as
proposed. Since assurance methods tend to be qualitative rather than quantitative,
they will need to be evaluated. Assurance can also be quite expensive, especially if
extensive testing is done.     It is   useful to evaluate the amount of assurance received
against the cost to   make a best value decision.       It is   important to consider assurance
methods within the context of the statement of work, evaluation plan, and
acceptance test plan.


The selection of assurance methods should be consistent with and follow from the
requirements analysis, especially from the risk analysis. Since some of the methods
are impossible for certain types of federal information processing (FIP) acquisition or
are restrictive of competition, care must be taken in selection.           See the note on
assurance and competition at the end of this appendix.


It   will normally be best to use a combination of methods.           Each method has
strengths and weaknesses in terms of cost and         what kind of assurance is actually
being delivered.   None are foolproof. Each method has restrictions.            An accrediting
and/or certifying official or computer security official can help determine the
strengths and weaknesses of each         method based on the type of system(s) being
procured.


Many of these assurances are evaluations. Care must be taken to know what
evaluation criteria were used and exactly what the evaluation means.            Evaluations
and testing all have limits.     No organization can afford to test every possibility
including   how the evaluated item interacts with other system components.

Methods

Testing/quality assurance.    There are many techniques that have been developed
for use with "critical" or high assurance systems. These techniques can be applied
to security software. These development and acceptance techniques provide
assurance for systems.    The following NIST publications provide further explanation:

         FIPS PUB 101          Guideline for Lifecycle Validation, Verification, and
                               Testing of Computer Software
         FIPS PUB 132          Guideline for Software Verification and Validation Plans
         SP 500-144            Guidance on Software Package Selection




                                                83
       SP 500-165            Software Verification and Validation: Its Role in
                             Computer Assurance and Its Relationship with Software
                             Product Management Standards
       SP 500-180            Guide to Software Acceptance

Agency quality assurance, safety, or reliability personnel may also be able to provide
assistance. The contractor developing the system or application can provide security
testing.  The development and acceptance testing can also be done by an
independent validation and verification contractor (IV&V). If testing is going to be
done by an independent contractor, this needs to be specified in the RFP.

NIST conformance testing and validation suites. NIST produces validation suites
and conformance testing to determine if a product (software, hardware, firmware)
meets specified standards. These test suites are developed for specific projects and
use many methods. New test suites are being developed. In general, testing is
performed by the vendor and validated by NIST, or testing is performed by a
certified laboratory. Following are examples of two types of NIST computer
security testing:


       DES implementation testing (reference Special Publication 500-20). To
       validate the correctness of the implementation, vendors run specified tests and
       send the results to NIST.     If the   vendor passes the test, NIST issues a
       validation certificate.


       FIPS PUB 113 data authentication algorithm testing and ANSI X9.17 key
       management for point-to-point environments. Vendors connect to a NIST
       bulletin board that interactively runs the test suite for the selected standard.
       If the   vendor passes the test, NIST issues a validation certificate.

Evaluations by government agencies. Government agencies evaluate products for
use in their environments. These evaluations may or may not be published. It is
important to ask offerors to supply evaluation results as part of an assurance
package. These evaluations are normally not endorsements by the agencies.


       NSA's Evaluated Products List (EPL). The National Security Agency
       (NSA) evaluates some computer operating systems and security packages
       against DoD 5200.28-STD, Trusted Computer Systems Evaluation Criteria
       (TCSEC or Orange Book).

Evaluations by independent organizations. Trade and professional organizations
are possible sources of independent evaluations. Ask offerors to provide information
on evaluations which they consider pertinent to their proposal.




                                               84
Evaluations by another vendor.               Private commercial organizations      may offer
product assurance testing and evaluations. These may lack the independence of
government and trade organization evaluations.

Evaluations by another government. Other governments, including several
European governments and Canada, are researching evaluation techniques and
criteria. Care should be taken to observe the differences in environments and
governmental priorities.

Product has been accredited to operate in similar situation.                    Once again, these
accreditations are not published.           It is   important to ask offerors to supply the
accreditation results.       These, even more so than evaluations, are not normally
endorsements.          Accreditations are environment and system specific.         Since
accreditation balance risk against advantages, the             same product may be accredited
for one environment but not for another.


Self-certification following a       formal procedure, e.g., FIPS 102.            A vendor self-
certificationdoes not rely on the work of an impartial or independent reviewer. It
is a vendor's  technical evaluation of a system to see how well it meets an internally
stated security requirement. Even though this method does not provide an impartial
review, it canstill provide some assurance.   The vendor's reputation is put on the
lineand a certification report can be read to determine if the security requirement
was defined and if a meaningful review was performed.

Self-certification       under the auspices/review of an independent organization.
This method may be able to combine the lower cost and greater speed of a self-
certification with the impartiality of an           independent review.     The review, however,
may not be as thorough as an evaluation or testing.

Warranties, Integrity Statements and                 Liabilities.   Warranties are another source of
assurance.      manufacturer/producer is willing to correct errors within certain time
                If a
frames or by the next release, this should give the purchaser a sense of commitment
to the   product and of product quality.            An integrity statement is a formal declaration
or certification of the product.       It   can be backed up by a promise to (a) fix the item
(warranty) or (b) pay for losses (liability) if the product does not conform to the
integrity statement. See section IV.E, "Legal Issues," for more information.

Manufacturer's published assertions.                 A manufacturer's or developer's published
assertion or formal declaration provides assurance based on their reputation.


Assurance documentation.     There are several types of assurance documentation.
Descriptions are provided in section IV.D, "Documentation."




                                                      85
Use of advanced or trusted development. Offerors may provide documentation to
show that they have used advanced or trusted system architectures, development
methodologies, or software engineering techniques. Use of the trusted computing
base (TCB) concept, formal modeling, and mathematical proofs are some examples.
Offerors should describe how these techniques and methodologies were employed
and how they help protect the system. (A specification for a trusted computer base
architecture   is   included in "Features in Systems," sec. IV.J.7.)


Assurance Methods and Competition.

Since not all assurance methods are equally available to all vendors, requiring any
one assurance method can limit competition. This is especially true for evaluations.
If the government specifies that a product pass a certain test to get on a list of
"qualified" products before it is acquired, then there may be special rules that must
be followed.        FAR 9.2 addresses qualified products.

The government, according to a basic procurement philosophy, tries to maintain a
"level playing field" while providing incentive for vendors to provide     advanced
products.    Requiring that a vendor use an assurance method that is not accessible by
all   vendors limits competition and may preclude the government from considering
new ideas.

There are many methods for increasing competition while still meeting the
government's requirements. Discuss with the contracting officer the use of scoring
assurance methods or providing incentives and disincentives. These can be used to
"give credit" to offerors who have had their products evaluated while maintaining
full and open competition.


Note:    In a scoring scheme, must be possible for an offeror to gain the maximum
                                  it

number of points possible using assurance methods that are equally accessible to all.

Contract Language for Validation Testing

The following considerations and contract language, based on the Federal ADP &
Telecommunications Standards Index, can be used to help increase assurance and
promote competition. Although the clauses are addressed to the use of NIST
conformance and validation testing, they can be modified for use with other forms
of assurance.       (Note:   Some NIST validations, such as DES validations, are required
and some are optional.)

Testing and validations can be performed at several stages during an acquisition.
These clauses address three types of testing: delayed validation, prior validation
testing, and prior validation. For delayed validation and prior validation testing, be




                                               86
sure to customize the time frame parameter in Part 2 of the solicitation wording to
ensure that any resubmissions for validations are done in a timely manner.


Delayed Validation.       When an agency determines that the nature of the requirement
is such that implementations of a    HPS may be offered that have not yet been tested
for conformance to that FIPS or if an implementation of the FIPS will be developed
during the course of the contract, the "Delayed Validation" solicitation wording
option should be used.


Prior Validation Testing.      When an agency determines that it is essential for
implementation of a FIPS to be previously tested for conformance to that FIPS
before being offered, and the nature of the requirement is such that an
implementation of a FIPS may be initially offered that has not been fully validated
(i.e., implementation has not fully demonstrated compliance to the FIPS), the "Prior

Validation Testing" solicitation wording option should be used. For example, some
validation procedures, especially for complex FIPS, allow for stages within the
process.


Prior Validation. When an agency determines that it is essential for
implementations of a FIPS be validated (i.e., implementation has been tested and has
demonstrated compliance to the FIPS) for conformance to that FIPS prior to being
offered the "Prior Validation" solicitation wording option should be used.


Solicitation   Wording:   Validation of FIPS Implementations


This clause can be modified to address particular FIPS and particular system
components. Within a solicitation, different testing options can be specified for
different components.


In addition to the FIPS implementation requirements specified
elsewhere in this requirements document, all implementations of FIPS
that are brought into the Federal inventory as a result of this
document for which validation is specified, and those implementation
used by vendors to develop programs or provide services shall be
validated using the official validation system specified by the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Computer
Systems Laboratory (CSL)   Validation shall be in accordance with
                                 .



CSL validation procedures for that FIPS.  The results of validation
shall be used to confirm that the implementation meets the
requirements of the applicable FIPS as specified in this document.

To be considered responsive the offeror shall:

(1) Provide validated FIPS implementation through (select testing
option and insert appropriate paragraph from below:  "Delayed
Validation," "Prior Validation Testing" or "Prior Validation.")

                                            87
(2)  Agree to correct all implementation nonconformance from the
applicable FIPS reflected in the validation summary report not
previously covered by a waiver. All areas of nonconformance must be
corrected within 12 months (or other time frame) from the date of
contract award (or from the date of the summary report) unless
otherwise specified in this document.  If an interpretation of the
FIPS is required that will invoke the procedures set forth in FIPS
PUB 29-2, such a request for interpretation shall be made within 30
calendar days after contract award. Any corrections that are
required as a result of decision made under the procedures of FIPS
PUB 29-2 shall be completed within 12 months of the date of the
formal notification to the contractor of the approval of the
interpretation.  Proof of correction in either case shall be in the
form of a CSL Certificate of Validation or registered validation
summary report for the corrected implementation. Failure to make
required corrections within the time limits set forth above shall be
deemed a failure to deliver required material. The liquidated
damages as specified for failure to deliver the operating system or
other system component (software, hardware or firmware) shall apply.

Testing Options:

"Delayed Validation"

      The offeror shall certify in the offer that all implementation
      of FIPS, including applicable FIPS options, offered or
      developed in response to this document will be submitted for
      validation.    If the implementations are to be developed they
      shall be submitted for validation upon delivery.   If the
      implementations are available and have not been previously
      tested or validated then the implementations shall be submitted
      for validation upon contract award.   In either case, when the
      implementation is submitted for validation the submission shall
      include a request to have the validation be completed at the
      earliest possible date permitted by the CSL validation
      procedures.   Unless specified elsewhere, proof of submission
      for validation shall be in the form of a letter scheduling the
      validation and the subsequent delivery by the offeror of a CSL
      registered report or CSL certificate immediately upon receipt
      thereof.   Proof of testing shall be provided in the form of a
      CSL registered validation summary report.   Proof of validation
      shall be in the form of a CSL Certificate of Validation.

"Prior Validation Testing"

      The offeror shall certify in the offer that all implementations
      of FIPS, including applicable FIPS options, offered in response
      to this document have been previously tested or validated and


                                  88
     included on the current list of validated products maintained
     by the Computer Systems Laboratory (CSL).  Unless specified
     elsewhere, proof of testing shall be provided in the form of a
     CSL registered validation summary report.  Proof of validation
     shall be in the form of a CSL Certificate of Validation.

"Prior Validation"

     The offeror shall certify in the offer that all implementation
     of FIPS, including applicable FIPS options, offered in response
     to this document have been previously validated and included on
     the current list of validated products maintained by Computer
     Systems Laboratory (CSL).  Unless specified elsewhere, proof of
     validation shall be in the form of a CSL Certificate of
     Validation




                                 89
                                                                                     Appendix C

                                  Planning Phase Risk Analysis



A planning phase risk analysis is similar to a "regular" risk analysis.            They share
the   same goal and overall strategy. The goal is to identify vulnerabilities and
offsetting controls. The logical outcome of any risk analysis is the acquisition
and/or implementation of cost-effective security controls.This is often referred to as
the risk reduction phase. (Another product of the risk analysis is the identification
of residual risk which cannot be further reduced or eliminated in an economically
feasible manner by currently available means.)


The strategy of a risk analysis is to examine potential losses that may result from
weaknesses in system security and the damage that may result from the occurrence
of certain threats.       In order to   do this, a risk analysis contains the following
components:

        Asset identification and valuation
        Threat analysis
        Vulnerability assessment
        Impact analysis
        Determination of risk

Since the goal of a risk analysis is the selection of cost-effective safeguards, a risk
analysis    is    actually a decision-support tool.    By identifying those areas with the
greatest potential for loss or harm, the risk analysis provides a basis for a system
manager to make informed choices about controls. This allows the manager to
allocate precious resources based on need and expected effectiveness.


The planning phase risk analysis is performed during the planning stage of system
acquisition and during the design stage of a system life cycle. As discussed in
section III.B.l.b and section III.B.2, this analysis        is   used as a basis for deciding
which safeguards are mandatory and which are desirable. The analysis should,
therefore, concentrate on items that are related to system acquisition decisions. In
addition,    it   will help support the evaluation plan's ranking of the desirable
safeguards.


As the term "planning phase" implies, further risk analysis is required during the life
of a system.         OMB Circular A- 130 requires periodic risk analysis for general
support systems.  However, depending on the nature of the system, how it is being
developed or acquired, and other factors, there are many places during the systems
life when a form of risk analysis may be useful.   In general, risk analysis should be



                                                  91
viewed as an iterative process to take into account changes in the system, the
system environment, and knowledge about the system. The nature of the risk
analysis should always be commensurate with the placement in the systems life and
the sensitivity of the system.



                     How to Perform a Planning Phase Risk Analysis

Although a planning phase risk analysis is very much like a risk analysis, there are
differences. A planning phase risk analysis is less precise. The analysis considers
projected costs, assets, threats and vulnerabilities, not current ones. The impacts of
failures are based on a projection of system use. The emphasis of risk analysis is
the assessment of existing assets and controls. The planning phase risk analysis
emphasizes the impacts of possible security problems and how to mitigate them.

The planning phase risk analysis should be performed in keeping with federal and
agency guidance. The agency risk analysis office or computer security office should
be consulted.

The planning phase risk analysis need not be a large and complex document.              It

should focus on defining and documenting system security requirements. The
purpose of a risk analysis is not to spend a lot of time trying to quantify or describe
assets and impacts but to provide a basis for making informed decisions about
system security. Therefore, the level of detail should be commensurate with the
sensitivity of the system and the need for decision support.


Existing agency risk analyses can be used as a starting point.           Since many
information processing resources are bought as part of either an existing facility,
application, or system,        many aspects including physical, application, user, and facility
environment may already be known.

A planning phase risk analysis methodology based on the FIRMR, Federal
Information Processing Standard Publication (FIPS PUB) 73 and other source
material   is   presented in    GAO Report Agencies Overlook Security Controls During
Development (GAO/IMTEC-88-11S) and reprinted below. Additional material on
risk analysis is available from the sources referenced in the GAO report and from:


  Special Publication 500-174           Guide for Selecting Automated Risk Analysis Tools
  NISTIR 4325                           U.S. Department of Energy Risk Assessment
                                        Methodology
  NISTIR 4749                           Sample Statements of Work for Federal Computer
                                        Security Services.




                                                 92
                                            GAO Methodology
This is a risk methodology, based on a system development life cycle, published by
the GAO. Agencies can use other methodologies or modify this one. Nothing in
this methodology is required. The methodology does not provide much detail; the
references cited above and in the methodology can be used to provide additional
guidance. (Note: FIRMR citations are from the 1988 version.)


                                                   Initial   Risks


1.       Identify the impact of major failure including:
         a.        an analysis of expected losses calculated in dollars or other significant
                   indicators    (FIRMR, Section 201-7.103-2) such as (FIPS 73, p. 27):
                   1.        extent of inconvenience or hardship to individuals.
                   2.        extent of lives lost.
                   3.        extent of disruption to the national            economy or national security.
         b.        an analysis of, but is not limited to, the impact of the following risks
                   (FIRMR, Section 201-7.103-2):
                   1.        physical destruction or loss of data and program files (also in
                             FIPS 73, p. 27; FIPS 31, p.             10).
                   2.        theft or disclosure of information (also in           FIPS 73, p. 7), data
                             confidentiality issues (FIPS 65, p. 9), improper dissemination and
                             careless disposal (FIPS 41, p. 12)
                   3.        misuse of ADP system, that is, fraud, vandalism, etc., (see also
                             falsified data,   FIPS 73, p. 27; theft of information or assets,
                             FIPS 31, p.    10).
                   4.        delay or prevention of ADP operation (see also unavailable data
                             or services,   FIPS 73, p. 27).
                   5.        lack of reliability of automated data processing equipment and
                             utilities.

                   6.        altered or inaccurate data (also in            FIPS 73, p. 25).
         c.        potential impacts are assessed for every application that will maintain
                   or process sensitive or mission-critical information (implied in FIPS 73,
                   p. 27).


2.     Estimate the frequency of major failure in the areas of:
         a.   inaccurate data,
         b. falsified data,
         c.   disclosed data,
         d. lost   data or programs, and
         e.   unavailable data or services (FIPS 73, p. 27).




                                                         93
3.   Estimate the cost of major failures:
        a.    Calculate an annual loss expectancy that combines the estimates of the
              value of potential loss and probability of loss (FIPS 31, p. 11). See
              prior risk section (2C.1.,2) for the impact and frequency of failure
              estimates that the agency should include in its analysis.
       b.     Remedial security measures are identified to address significant threats
              (FIPS 31, p. 13) and vulnerabilities (FIPS 73, p. 25), including
              measures such as:
              1. altering the environment (FIPS 31, p. 13),

              2. erecting barriers (FIPS 31, p. 13),
              3. improving procedures (FIPS 31, p. 13),
              4. early detection (FIPS 31, p. 13), and
              5. contingency plans (FIPS 31, p. 13).
       c.     The cost of remedial measures is identified including an identification
              of the least cost mix of security measures (FIPS 31, p. 13).




                                           94
                                                                                   Appendix D

                                        GLOSSARY

Acceptance      The act of an authorized representative of the government by which
the government, for itself or as agent of another, assumes control or ownership of
existing identified supplies tendered or approves specific services rendered as partial
or complete performance of the contract. It is the final determination whether or
not a facility or system meets the specified technical and performance standards.


Access control      Specifically computer systems access control.         Restrictions on the
types of interactions between subjects    (i.e.,   persons) and objects   (i.e., files   or data
elements).     Access can be divided into types of access such as read, write, modify,
or execute.     (Access control also includes physical access control.)

Acquisition  Acquiring by contract with appropriated funds supplies or services by
and for the use of the federal government through purchase or lease, whether the
supplies or services are already in existence, or must be created, developed,
demonstrated, and evaluated.     Acquisition begins at the point when agency needs are
established and includes the description of requirements to satisfy agency needs,
solicitation and selection of sources, award of contract, contract financing, contract
performance, contract administration and those technical and management function
directly related to the process of fulfilling agency needs by contract. See also
procurement.

Accreditation     A critical management decision made by an agency official regarding
the adequacy of security safeguards,       whether the safeguards reduce risk to an
                                        i.e.,

acceptable level for the intended function. It must be based on reliable technical
information. It is the approval to operate a computer system. See certification.


ADP    Automatic data processing. ADP refers to the resources used to process
automated information, including telecommunications. The FIRMR now uses the
term Federal Information Processing (FIP) resources.

Administration      Specifically contract administration.     Government management of a
contract to ensure that the government receives the quality of products and services
specified in the contract within established costs and schedules.


Analysis of integrity, availability, and confidentiality requirements An analysis
of the protection requirements of a system based on the system's need for integrity,
availability, and/or confidentiality.




                                                95
Analysis of level of assurance An analysis of the level of confidence needed that
the security of a system will work correctly and will be effective. This analysis
forms the basis for the procurement evaluation plan and/or acceptance plan.

Assurance A measure of confidence that the security features and architecture of a
computer system meet the security requirements.

Authenticate     To establish the validity of a claimed identity.

BAFO      Best and Final Offer.      An opportunity for offerors in the competitive range
to   submit final proposals.

Bidder     Any entity that responds to an invitation for bids with a bid.    See offeror.

Benchmark       A test of the capabilities of a proposed system using customized
workloads

Certification
1)      Security certification    A technical analysis of a system or application relative
        to a set of system requirements     used for the purpose of accreditation.   See
        accreditation.
2)      Security certification A technical analysis and formal declaration by an
        agency official that an application or system meets all applicable federal
        policies, regulations, and standards, and that safeguards are adequate for the
        application.
3)      Procurement certification       A signed statement by an offeror.

Closeout    Includes all final contract activities, e.g., ensuring completion of all
requirements, making the final payment.


Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS)           Software and hardware that already exists.    It is

also referred to as off-the-shelf.


Competition in Contracting Act of 1984 (CICA)             A statute that made several
revisions to federal contracting including requiring that specifications be developed in
an "unrestricted manner" to obtain full and open competition.

Computer Security The protection of automatic data processing assets from harm.
                                                                     Harm is
This includes the protection of data, hardware, firmware, and software.
defined as a loss of integrity, availability, or confidentiality.


Computer Security Act of 1987 A statute "to provide for a computer standards
program with the (National Institute of Standards and Technology), to provide for


                                              96
government-wide computer security, and to provide for the training in security
matters of persons who are involved in the management, operation, and use of
federal computer systems, and for other purposes."


Confidential      Private, nondisclosable.    (In this guideline confidential   never refers to
classified material.)


Contingency planning        Plans to assure that users can continue to perform essential
functions and that a reasonable continuity of data processing support is provided at
all   times.   These plans can include emergency response, backup operation, and post-
disaster recovery.


Contracting Officer (CO)        A person with the authority to enter into, administer,
and/or terminate contracts and make related determination and findings.


Contracting Officer's Technical Representative (COTR)               An individual to whom
the Contracting Officer delegates certain contract responsibilities, usually related to
technical direction and acceptance issues.Also called Government Technical
Representative (GTR) or the Contracting Officer's Representative (COR).


DAC       See discretionary access control.

Delegation of Procurement Authority (DPA) A grant of authority by GSA to
acquire FTP resources or services. See section II.B.2.


Deliverable      A product or service that is prepared for and delivered to the
government under the terms of a contract.

DES   Data Encryption Standard. FIPS PUB 46-1. Specifies an algorithm to be
implemented for cryptographic protection of sensitive data.

Discretionary access control A means of restricting access to objects based on the
identity of subjects and/or groups to which they belong. The controls are
discretionary in the sense that a subject with a certain access permission is capable
of passing that permission (perhaps indirectly) on to any other subject. See access
control and mandatory access control.


Directed specification A specification that must be included in statements of work
based on federal law, policy, or regulation.

Domain The unique context in which a program is operating.




                                                97
Evaluation
1)       Security evaluation    The examination of the technical and nontechnical
security features of a computer system and other safeguards that establishes the
extent to which a particular design and implementation meet a specified set of
security requirements.
2)       Procurement technical evaluation      The examination of proposals in order to
determine technical acceptability and merit.      This is part of the source selection
process.
3)       Product security evaluation     The examination of the security features of a
product against a stated set of requirements or criteria.     Product evaluations are
often performed in a laboratory setting.


Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) The regulation that codifies uniform
acquisition policies and procedures for Executive agencies.


Federal Information Processing (FIP) FIP refers to the resources and services
used to process automated information, including telecommunications.

Federal Information Resources Management Regulation              (FIRMR) The
regulation that sets forth uniform policies and procedures pertaining to acquisition of
information resources; used in conjunction with the FAR.


Features Specifically technical security features. The security-relevant functions,
mechanisms, and characteristics of system hardware, firmware, and software.
Technical security features are a subset of system security safeguards.


FIPS PUB       Federal Information Processing Standards Publication


Flowdown The extension of prime contractor requirements to subcontractors.

Full    and open competition     The consideration of all responsible sources in a
procurement, as required by the Competition in Contracting Act.


GSBCA       General Services Board of Contract Appeals.

GTR      Government Technical Representative.       See Contracting Officer's Technical
Representative.


IFB     Invitation for Bid.   A solicitation document used when contracting by sealed
bids.


ITSEC      Information Technology Security Evaluation Criteria.      The harmonized
security criteria of France,   Germany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom.


                                             98
IY&V       Independent Verification and Validation.

Label
1)        Security label    A piece of information that tells a system how to handle data.
The label can be used to control access, specify protective measures, or indicate
handling restrictions required by a security policy.
2)     Access control label       A
                                  piece of information that represents the security level
or sensitivity designation of data in an object or the access authorization of a
subject.


Latent defects Defects that exist at the time of acceptance but are not discoverable
by a reasonable inspection.

Liquidated damages       Compensation to the government for damages that result from
the contractor failing to deliver supplies or perform services. (See FAR 12.2 and
52.212-4).


Live test demonstrations (LTDs) The demonstration of capability or period of
time during which a government user requires an offeror to perform certain user-
witnessed activities.      These can include one or more benchmark tests.   These occur
prior to contract award.


MAC        Message authentication code or mandatory access control.

Mandatory access control          A means of restricting access to objects based on the
sensitivity (as represented    by a label) of the information contained in the objects and
the formal authorization of subjects to access information of such sensitivity.    In a
mandatory access control environment, users cannot pass their access rights to others
without express concurrence of the access control authority. See access control and
discretionary access control.


Mandatory requirements Those contractual conditions and technical specifications
that are established    by the government as being essential to meeting required needs.

Mechanism       Specifically security mechanism.    See safeguard.

Multi-label   Having information with different sensitivities on one system. A multi-
label secure system permits simultaneous access by users not authorized by the
mandatory access authority to access all of the data and prevents unauthorized
access.    This term is normally used to describe systems with nonhierarchical
information sensitivities and where the system is relied upon to enforce a mandatory
policy.    See label and multilevel.


                                              99
Multilevel   Having information with different sensitivities on one system. A
multilevel secure system permits simultaneous access by users not authorized by the
mandatory access authority to access all of the data and prevents unauthorized
access.   This term is normally used to describe systems with hierarchical information
sensitivities and where the system is relied upon to enforce a mandatory policy.   See
multi-label.


Needs determination An assessment, performed as part of initial system planning,
which looks at the needs of an agency that might be met through automation.

Object     A passive entity that contains or receives information.             Access to an object
implies access to the information        it   contains.    Examples of objects are:     records,
blocks,   files,   programs, video displays, printers, network nodes, etc.

Object reuse         The removal of residual data from a system resource prior to
reassignment and reuse.

Off-the-shelf        Software and hardware that already exists.        It is   also referred to as
commercial off-the-shelf (COTS).

Offeror     Any entity that responds to an RFP with a proposal.                See bidder.

Orange Book           See TCSEC.

Preaward survey           An evaluation by a surveying activity of a prospective
contractor's capability to perform a proposed contract.


Presolicitation        The period preceding release of a solicitation that includes
preparation of documentation required by federal regulations.


Procedure          Specifically security procedure.       A type of safeguard based on human
actions (as opposed to technical features).           These can be referred to as
administrative safeguards.


Procurement Includes all stages of the process of acquiring property or services,
beginning with the process for determining need for the property or services and
ending with contract completion and closeout.

Procurement initiator     The key person who represents the program office in
formulating information resources requirements and managing presolicitation
activities. Also called program manager, sponsor. This person often becomes the
contracting officer's technical representative (COTR).



                                                   100
Program manager         See procurement initiator.

Protest     Awritten objection by an interested party to a solicitation for a proposed
contract for the acquisition of supplies or services or a written objection by an
interested party to a proposed     award or the award of such a contract.

RFC   Request for Comment. An announcement requesting industry comment on a
proposed system or other acquisition.

RFI Request for Information. An announcement requesting information from
industry in regard to a planned acquisition and, in    some cases, requesting corporate
capability information.


RFP       Request for Proposals.A solicitation document used in negotiated
acquisitions to   communicate government requirements and to solicit proposals.

RFQ       Request for Quotation. A solicitation document used in negotiated
acquisitions to   communicate government requirements and to solicit quotations.

Requirements analysis       A part of the acquisition cycle in which the requirements
for a system are developed.


Responsible prospective contractor To be responsible, a prospective contractor
must meet the requirements of FAR 9.104-1 which include the ability to be able
perform the contract based on the financial, technical, organizational, ethical, and
legal position of the contractor.


Responsive prospective contractor To be responsive, a prospective contractor must
comply in all material respects with the solicitation.

Restrictive specification     A detailed and precise description of an item(s) being
acquired that needlessly limits competition, e.g., "brand name" without the words "or
equal."


Risk analysis      The process of examining assets, threats, and vulnerabilities in order
to   determine cost-effective security controls.


Safeguard Any action, device, feature, mechanism, procedure, technique, or other
measure that reduces the vulnerability of or threat to a system. Also called controls
or countermeasures.




                                             101
Sensitive information Any information which the loss, misuse, modification of, or
unauthorized access to, could affect the national interest or the conduct of federal
programs, or the privacy to which individuals are entitled under Section 552a of
Title 5, U.S.  Code, but that has not been specifically authorized under criteria
established by an Executive order or an act of Congress to be kept classified in the
interest of national defense or foreign policy.


Sensitivity assessment      An initial assessment of the general sensitivity of an agency
function.


Single-label     A subset of a multi-label system in which only one type of labeled
information is processed at a time.       See label and multi-label.

Solicitation    An official government request for bids/proposals often publicized in
the    Commerce Business Daily.

Source selection      The process of evaluating proposals and determining which offeror
will    be selected for contract award.

SEB      Source Evaluation Board.     A board comprised of technical, contract,
information resources management, and other representatives whose primary function
is to   evaluate proposals received in response to an RFP.


Specification     A description of the technical requirements for a material, product, or
service.    Specifications should state only the government's actual   minimum needs
and be designed to promote full and open competition, with due regard for the
nature of the services to be acquired.


Sponsor      See procurement initiator.

Statement of work (SOW) A statement of the technical specification in the RFP
                work or system required by the government.
that describes the


Subject An active entity, generally a person, process, or device that causes actions
such as the flow of information.

TCSEC    Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria. DoD 5200.28-STD. The
Department of Defense security evaluation criteria. Also called the Orange Book.

Threat Any circumstance or event with the potential to cause harm to a system in
the form of destruction, disclosure, modification of data, and/or denial of service.




                                              102
Trusted computing base (TCB) Specifically DoD 5200.28. The totality of
protection mechanisms within a computer system — including hardware, firmware,
and software — that are responsible for enforcing a security policy.

Vetting                                  The process of investigating personnel with
              Specifically personnel vetting.
the intent to approve or disapprove access to government resources. The
investigations can range from minimal checks to full background investigations.
Also called personnel screening.

Vulnerability  A weakness in system security procedures, system design,
implementation, internal controls, physical environment, etc.


Warner Amendment 10 USCA 2315. Excludes certain systems from the
requirements of Section 111 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act
of 1949 (40 USC 795), including automatic data processing equipment or services if
the function, operation, or use of the equipment of services involves intelligence
activities,   involves cryptographic activities related to national security, involves the
command and control of military forces, equipment that is an integral part of a
weapon or weapons system, or is critical to the direct fulfillment of military or
intelligence missions except for equipment or services to be used for routine
administrative and business application (including payroll, finance, logistics, and
personnel management applications).




                                                103
                                                                        Appendix E

                                        References



Acquisition of Information Resources:    Overview Guide, U.S. General Services
Administration; January 1990.


Boehm, B. W., "Software Engineering."      IEEE Transactions on Computers, C-25,
December, 1976.

Agencies Overlook Security Controls During Development, General Accounting
Office Report to the Chairman, Committee on Science, Spec, and technology, House
of Representative;   May 1988; GAO/IMTEC-88-11 and GAO/IMTEC-88-11S.

Computer Security Act of 1987, Public Law 100-235.

Department of Defense Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria, Department of
Defense; December 1985; DOD 5200.28-STD.


Federal Acquisition Regulation, Department of Defense, General Services
Administration and National Aeronautics and Space Administration.


Federal ADP & Telecommunications Standards Index, General Services
Administration; April, 1991.


Federal Information Resources Management Regulation, General Services
Administration; 41    CFR 201.

Federal Personnel Manual, Chapters 731, 732, and 736, Office of Personnel
Management.

Frankel, S. ed. Guidance on Software Package Selection, National Bureau of
Standards (U.S.);    November 1986; Special Publication 500-144.

Gilbert, Dennis, et al,   Sample Statements of Work for Federal Computer Security
Services, National Institute of Standards and Technology;   November 1991; NIST
Interagency Report 4749.


              Guide for Selecting Automated Risk Analysis Tools, National Institute
Gilbert, Irene,
of Standards and Technology; October 1989; Special Publication 500-174.




                                           105
Glossary of Computer Security Terms, National Computer Security Center; October
1988;     NCSC-TG-004.

Guidance to Federal Agencies on the Use of Trusted Systems Technology, National
Institute of Standards and Technology; July 1990; NCSL Bulletin.


Guideline for Computer Security Certification and Accreditation, National Bureau of
Standards (U.S.); September 1983; FIPS PUB 102.


Guidelines for Security of Computer Applications, National Bureau of Standards
(U.S.);   June 1980; FIPS PUB 73.

Information Technology Security Evaluation Criteria, Herausgeber: Der
Bundesminister des Inner, Bonn, Mai 1990.

Kiely, John, Assuring the Integrity of Purchased Software, Computer Security
Institute 17th Annual Computer Security Conference; November 1990.


Model Framework for Management Control Over Automated Information Systems,
President's Council on Management Improvement and the President's Council on
Integrity   and Efficiency; January 1988.

NASA Automated Information Security Handbook, National Aeronautics and Space
Administration; September 1990;     NASA Handbook 2410.9.
Office of Management and Budget Circular A- 130, Management of Federal
Information Resources, December 1985.

Review of General Controls in Federal Computer Systems, President's Council on
Integrity and Efficiency; October 1988.


Ruthberg, Zella G et al, Guide to Auditing for Controls and Security:   A System
Development Life Cycle Approach, National Bureau of Standards (U.S.); April 1988;
Special Publication 500-153.


Standard Security Label for the Government Open Systems Interconnection Profile,
National Institute of Standards and Technology; February 28, 1991; draft FIPS PUB.


Todd, Mary Ann and Constance Guitian, Computer Security Training Guidelines,
National Institute of Standards and Technology; November 1989; Special Publication
500-172.




                                            106
U.S.   Department of Energy Risk Assessment Methodology, National Institute of
Standards and Technology; May, 1990, Interagency Report 4325.


Wallace, Dolores R. and John C. Cherniavsky, Guide to Software Acceptance,
National Institute of Standards and Technology, April 1990; Special Publication
500-180.


Wallace, Dolores and Roger Fujii, Software Verification and Validation: Its Role in
Computer Assurance and Its Relationship with Software Product Management
Standards, National Institute of Standards and Technology; September 1989, Special
Publication 500-165.




* U.S. G. P.O.: 1992-311 -891: 60651      107
 NIST-114A                                            U.S. DEPARTMENT OF        COMMERCE           1.   PUBUCATION OR REPORT NUMBER
 (REV. 3-90)                 NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY                             NIST/SP-800/4
                                                                                                   2.   PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER

                           BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA SHEET                                                3.   PUBUCATION DATE
                                                                                                        March 1992
4.    TITLE AND SUBTITLE
      Computer Security Considerations in Federal Procurements:                                 A Guide for Procurement Initiators
      Contracting Officers and Computer Security Officials

S.    AUTHOR(S)


 Barbara Guttman
5.    PERFORMING ORGANIZATION (IF JOINT OR OTHER THAN NIST, SEE INSTRUCTIONS)                      7.   CONTRACT/GRANT NUMBER
      U.S. DEPARTMENT OF   COMMERCE
      NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
      GAITHERSBURG, MD 20899                                                                       8.   TYPE OF REPORT AND PERIOD COVERED
                                                                                                        Final
3.    SPONSORING ORGANIZATION NAME AND COMPLETE ADDRESS (STREET, CITY, STATE, ZIP)



      Same as item #6

10.   SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES




11.   ABSTRACT (A 200-WORD OR LESS FACTUAL SUMMARY OF MOST SIGNIFICANT INFORMATION.       IF   DOCUMENT INCLUDES A SIGNIFICANT BIBUOGRAPHY OR
      LITERATURE SURVEY, MENTION IT HERE.)



      This document is intended to help agencies select and aquire cost-effective computer
      security by explaining how to include computer security requirements in federal
      information processing (FIP) procurements. The guideline has three parts. The first
      part is an introduction to the two disciplines of computer security and FIP procurement,
      which provide sufficient knowledge to understand the legal, conceptual, and regulatory
      underpinnings of the document.

          The second part explains the integration of computer security into the FIP                                      procurement
          process.  The guideline recommends that the following analyses be included                                      in pro-
          curement documentation:  sensitivity determination; analysis of integrity,                                      availability,
          and confidentiality requirements; analysis of level of assurance required;                                      and a
          planning phase risk analysis.

          The third part of the document includes specifications and contract language for specific
          computer security features, assurances, and procedures that can be included in FIP
          procurements.




 2.   KEY WORDS (6 TO 12 ENTRIES; ALPHABETICAL ORDER; CAPITAUZE ONLY PROPER NAMES; AND SEPARATE KEY WORDS BY SEMICOLONS)


          acquisition; assurance; computer security; procurement; requirements analysis; risk
          analysis; specifications

 3.   AVAILABILITY                                                                                              14.   NUMBER OF PRINTED PAGES
      X     UNLIMITED
                                                                                                                        112
            FOR OFFICIAL DISTRIBUTION. DO NOT RELEASE TO NATIONAL TECHNICAL INFORMATION SERVICE (NTIS).
                                                                                                                15.   PRICE
            ORDER FROM SUPERINTENDENT OF DOCUMENTS, U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE,
            WASHINGTON, DC 20402.
             ORDER FROM NATIONAL TECHNICAL INFORMATION SERVICE (NTIS), SPRINGFIELD, VA 22161.

 LECTRONIC FORM
            ANNOUNCEMENT OF NEW PUBLICATIONS ON
                    COMPUTER SECURITY




Superintendent of Documents
Government Printing Office
Washington,   DC 20402

Dear Sir:

  Please add my name to the announcement list of new publications to be issued in
the series: National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-.


Name

Company

Address

City                             State                      Zip Code




(Notification key N-503)
IiJLLjm. Technical Publications
Periodical

Journal of Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology— Reports NIST
research and development in those disciplines of the physical and engineering sciences in which
the Institute is active. These include physics, chemistry, engineering, mathematics, and computer
sciences.
Papers cover a broad range of subjects, with major emphasis on measurement methodology and
the basic technology underlying standardization. Also included from time to time are survey
articles on topics closely related to the Institute's technical and scientific programs. Issued six
times a year.



Nonperiodicals

Monographs— Major contributions to the technical literature on various subjects related to the
Institute's scientific   and technical activities.
Handbooks— Recommended codes of engineering and industrial practice (including safety codes)
developed in cooperation with in terested industries, professional organizations, and regulatory
bodies.
Special Publications — Include proceedings of conferences sponsored by NIST, NIST annual
reports, and other special publications appropriate to this grouping such as wall charts, pocket
cards, and bibliographies.
Applied Mathematics Series— Mathematical tables, manuals, and studies of special interest to
physicists, engineers, chemists, biologists, mathematicians, computer programmers, and others
engaged in scientific and technical work.
National Standard Reference Data Series— Provides quantitative data on the physical and chemical
properties of materials, compiled from the world's literature and critically evaluated. Developed
under a worldwide program coordinated by NIST under the authority of the National Standard
Data Act (Public Law 90-396). NOTE: The Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data
(JPCRD) is published bimonthly for NIST by the American Chemical Society (ACS) and the
American Institute of Physics (AIP). Subscriptions, reprints, and supplements are available from
ACS, 1155 Sixteenth St., NW., Washington, DC 20056.
Building Science Series — Disseminates technical information developed at the Institute on building
materials, components, systems, and whole structures. The series presents research results, test
methods, and performance criteria related to the structural and environmental functions and the
durability and safety characteristics of building elements and systems.
Technical Notes— Studies or reports which are complete in themselves but restrictive in their
treatment of a subject. Analogous to monographs but not so comprehensive in scope or definitive
in treatment of the subject area. Often serve as a vehicle for final reports of work performed at
NIST under the sponsorship of other government agencies.
Voluntary Product Standards— Developed under procedures published by the Department of
Commerce in Part 10, Title 15, of the Code of Federal Regulations. The standards establish
nationally recognized requirements for products, and provide all concerned interests with a basis
for common understanding of the characteristics of the products. NIST administers this program
as a supplement to the activities of the private sector standardizing organizations.
Consumer Information Series— Practical information, based on NIST research and experience,
covering areas of interest to the consumer. Easily understandable language and illustrations
provide useful background knowledge for shopping in today's technological marketplace.
Order the above NIST publications from: Superintendent of Documents, Government Printing Office,
Washington,   DC 20402.
Order the following NIST publications -FIPS and NISTIRs-from the National Technical Information
Service, Springfield,   VA 22161.
Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUB)— Publications in this series
collectively constitute the Federal Information Processing Standards Register. The Register serves
as the official source of information in the Federal Government regarding standards issued by
NIST pursuant to the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended,
Public Law 89-306 (79 Stat. 1127), and as implemented by Executive Order 11717 (38 FR 12315,
dated May 11, 1973) and Part 6 of Title 15 CFR (Code of Federal Regulations).
NIST Interagency Reports (NISTTR)— A special series of interim or final reports on work
performed by NIST for outside sponsors (both government and non-government). In general,
initial distribution is handled by the sponsor; public distribution is by the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, VA 22161, in paper copy or microfiche form.
     g
     Xi
     o

     T3
V C
aJ       v>
1*2
s    §
o e                     s
U on2_ o\
O    »H
     t
       9S     O
e             Q
E
eg                 3
O.                 CQ
o»
Q        C3   t-   _
                    2
                   "8
