      Withdrawn NIST Technical Series Publication

                                           Warning Notice

The attached publication has been withdrawn (archived), and is provided solely for historical purposes.
It may have been superseded by another publication (indicated below).

Withdrawn Publication
Series/Number            NIST Special Publication 800-47
Title                    Security Guide for Interconnecting Information Technology Systems
Publication Date(s)      August 2002
Withdrawal Date          July 20, 2021
Withdrawal Note          SP 800-47 is superseded in its entirety by the publication of SP 800-47 Revision
                         1.
Superseding Publication(s) (if applicable)

The attached publication has been superseded by the following publication(s):
Series/Number            NIST Special Publication 800-47 Revision 1
Title                    Managing the Security of Information Exchanges
Author(s)                Kelley Dempsey; Victoria Pillitteri; Andrew Regenscheid
Publication Date(s)      July 2021
URL/DOI                  https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-47r1
Additional Information (if applicable)
Contact                  Computer Security Division (Information Technology Laboratory)
                         sec-cert@nist.gov
Latest revision of the
attached publication
Related Information
Withdrawal
Announcement Link




Date updated: July 20, 2021
                          NIST Special Publication 800-47




Security Guide for
Interconnecting Information
Technology Systems

Recommendations of the National Institute
of Standards and Technology

Tim Grance
Joan Hash
Steven Peck
Jonathan Smith
Karen Korow-Diks
NIST Special Publication 800-47            Security Guide for
                                           Interconnecting Information
                                           Technology Systems
                                           Recommendations of the National Institute of
                                           Standards and Technology




          C O M P U T E R                              S E C U R I T Y

                           Computer Security Division
                           Information Technology Laboratory
                           National Institute of Standards and Technology
                           Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930


                           August 2002




                           U.S. Department of Commerce
                                   Donald L. Evans, Secretary

                           Technology Administration
                                   Phillip J. Bond, Under Secretary for Technology

                           National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                   Arden L. Bement, Jr., Director
                                     Acknowledgements
The authors, Joan Hash and Tim Grance of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST),
and Steven Peck, Jonathan Smith, and Karen Korow-Diks of Booz Allen Hamilton, wish to thank their
colleagues who reviewed drafts of this document and contributed to its technical content. We also
gratefully acknowledge and appreciate the many comments we received from readers of the public and
private sectors, whose valuable insights improved the quality and usefulness of this document. Finally,
we wish to express thanks to the U.S. Customs Service for use of the Interconnection Security Agreement
(ISA) guidance document and sample ISA, which are included in this document.




Any mention of commercial products or reference to commercial organizations is for information only; it
 does not imply recommendation or endorsement by NIST nor does it imply that the products mentioned
                         are necessarily the best available for the purpose.




                                                   i
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING IT SYSTEMS


                                                   Table of Contents


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ........................................................................................................ES-1

1.    INTRODUCTION................................................................................................................1-1
       1.1    Authority...................................................................................................................1-1
       1.2    Purpose....................................................................................................................1-1
       1.3    Scope.......................................................................................................................1-1
       1.4    Audience ..................................................................................................................1-1
       1.5    Other Approaches to System Interconnectivity........................................................1-2
       1.6    Document Structure .................................................................................................1-2
2.    BACKGROUND.................................................................................................................2-1

3.    PLANNING A SYSTEM INTERCONNECTION .................................................................3-1
       3.1    Step 1: Establish a Joint Planning Team .................................................................3-1
       3.2    Step 2: Define the Business Case ...........................................................................3-1
       3.3    Step 3: Perform Certification and Accreditation .......................................................3-2
       3.4    Step 4: Determine Interconnection Requirements ...................................................3-2
       3.5    Step 5: Document Interconnection Agreement ........................................................3-5
       3.6    Step 6: Approve or Reject System Interconnection .................................................3-6
4.    ESTABLISHING A SYSTEM INTERCONNECTION .........................................................4-1
       4.1    Step 1: Develop an Implementation Plan.................................................................4-1
       4.2    Step 2: Execute the Implementation Plan................................................................4-1
       4.3    Step 3: Activate the Interconnection ........................................................................4-6
5.    MAINTAINING A SYSTEM INTERCONNECTION............................................................5-1
       5.1    Maintain Clear Lines of Communication ..................................................................5-1
       5.2    Maintain Equipment .................................................................................................5-2
       5.3    Manage User Profiles ..............................................................................................5-2
       5.4    Conduct Security Reviews .......................................................................................5-2
       5.5    Analyze Audit Logs ..................................................................................................5-2
       5.6    Report and Respond to Security Incidents ..............................................................5-3
       5.7    Coordinate Contingency Planning Activities ............................................................5-3
       5.8    Perform Change Management.................................................................................5-3
       5.9    Maintain System Security Plans ..............................................................................5-4
6.    DISCONNECTING A SYSTEM INTERCONNECTION......................................................6-1
       6.1    Planned Disconnection ............................................................................................6-1
       6.2    Emergency Disconnection .......................................................................................6-1
       6.3    Restoration of Interconnection .................................................................................6-2




                                                                    ii
                                                  List of Appendixes

Appendix A—Interconnection Security Agreement................................................................... A-1
Appendix B—Memorandum of Understanding/Agreement....................................................... B-1
Appendix C—System Interconnection Implementation Plan .................................................... C-1
Appendix D—Glossary.............................................................................................................. D-1
Appendix E—References.......................................................................................................... E-1
Appendix F—Index ................................................................................................................... F-1


                                                      List of Figures

Figure 2-1. Interconnection Components...................................................................................2-1
Figure 3-1. Steps to Plan a System Interconnection..................................................................3-1
Figure 4-1. Steps to Establish a System Interconnection ..........................................................4-1
Figure A-1. ISA Sample ............................................................................................................ A-5
Figure B-1. MOU/A Sample ...................................................................................................... B-3




                                                                  iii
                              SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Security Guide for Interconnecting Information Technology Systems provides guidance for planning,
establishing, maintaining, and terminating interconnections between information technology (IT) systems
that are owned and operated by different organizations. The guidelines are consistent with the
requirements specified in the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, Appendix III,
for system interconnection and information sharing.

A system interconnection is defined as the direct connection of two or more IT systems for the purpose of
sharing data and other information resources. The document describes various benefits of interconnecting
IT systems, identifies the basic components of an interconnection, identifies methods and levels of
interconnectivity, and discusses potential security risks associated with an interconnection.

The document then presents a “life-cycle management” approach for interconnecting IT systems, with an
emphasis on security. The four phases of the interconnection life cycle are addressed:

    +   Planning the interconnection: the participating organizations perform preliminary activities;
        examine all relevant technical, security, and administrative issues; and form an agreement
        governing the management, operation, and use of the interconnection.

    +   Establishing the interconnection: the organizations develop and execute a plan for establishing
        the interconnection, including implementing or configuring appropriate security controls.

    +   Maintaining the interconnection: the organizations actively maintain the interconnection after it
        is established to ensure that it operates properly and securely.

    +   Disconnecting the interconnection: one or both organizations may choose to terminate the
        interconnection. The termination should be conducted in a planned manner to avoid disrupting
        the other party’s system. In response to an emergency, however, one or both organizations may
        decide to terminate the interconnection immediately.
The document provides recommended steps for completing each phase, emphasizing security measures
that should be taken to protect the connected systems and shared data.

The document also contains guides and samples for developing an Interconnection Security Agreement
(ISA) and a Memorandum of Understanding/Agreement (MOU/A). The ISA specifies the technical and
security requirements of the interconnection, and the MOU/A defines the responsibilities of the
participating organizations. Finally, the document contains a guide for developing a System
Interconnection Implementation Plan, which defines the process for establishing the interconnection,
including scheduling and costs.




                                                  ES-1
                               SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


1.    INTRODUCTION

1.1   Authority

This document has been developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) in
furtherance of its statutory responsibilities under the Computer Security Act of 1987 and the Information
Technology Management Reform Act of 1996, specifically 15 United States Code (U.S.C.) 278 g-3
(a)(5). This document is not a guideline within the meaning of 15 U.S.C 278 g-3 (a)(3).

These guidelines are for use by federal organizations that process sensitive information. They are
consistent with the requirements of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130,
Appendix III.

This document may be used by nongovernmental organizations on a voluntary basis. It is not subject to
copyright.

Nothing in this document should be taken to contradict standards and guidelines made mandatory and
binding upon federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under statutory authority. Nor should these
guidelines be interpreted as altering or superseding the existing authorities of the Secretary of Commerce,
the Director of the OMB, or any other federal official.

1.2   Purpose

This document provides guidance for planning, establishing, maintaining, and terminating
interconnections between information technology (IT) systems that are owned and operated by different
organizations, including organizations within a single federal agency.

1.3   Scope

This document is published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) as
recommended guidance for federal agencies. It also may be used by nongovernmental (private sector)
organizations. This document presents general guidelines for interconnecting IT systems. Other forms of
information exchange, such as the use of browser cookies to exchange information between Web portal
sites, are beyond the scope of this document, although guidance contained herein may be useful for
developing such exchanges.

This document does not address classified systems or data, and it should not be used for guidance on
securing such systems. Federal agencies should rely on applicable laws, regulations, and policies for
interconnecting systems that are used to store, process, or transmit classified data.

1.4   Audience

This document is intended for system owners, data owners, program managers, security officers, system
architects, system administrators, and network administrators who are responsible for planning,
approving, establishing, maintaining, or terminating system interconnections. It is written in nontechnical
language for use by a broad audience. It does not address specific information technologies.




                                                    1-1
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


1.5   Other Approaches to System Interconnectivity

This document provides a recommended approach for interconnecting IT systems. It is recognized,
however, that many organizations have interconnected IT systems using different approaches, and some
organizations follow specific procedures to meet unique operational requirements.

This document is intended only as guidance and it should not be construed as defining the only approach
possible. It provides a logical framework for those organizations that have not previously interconnected
IT systems, and it provides information that other organizations may use to enhance the security of
existing interconnections. Organizations should tailor the guidelines to meet their specific needs and
requirements.

1.6   Document Structure

This document is organized into six sections. Section 1 introduces the document. Section 2 describes the
benefits of interconnecting IT systems, identifies the basic components of an interconnection, identifies
methods and levels of interconnectivity, and discusses potential risks of interconnecting systems.

Sections 3 through 6 address the interconnection life-cycle. Section 3 presents recommended steps for
planning a system interconnection. Section 4 provides recommended steps for establishing the
interconnection. Section 5 provides recommended steps for maintaining the system interconnection after
it is established. Section 6 provides guidelines for terminating the interconnection and restoring it after it
is terminated.

Appendix A provides a guide for developing an Interconnection Security Agreement, which documents
the technical requirements of the interconnection, as well as a sample agreement. Appendix B provides a
guide for developing a Memorandum of Understanding/Agreement, which defines the responsibilities of
the participating organizations, as well as a sample memorandum. Appendix C provides a guide for
developing a System Interconnection Implementation Plan, which defines the process of establishing the
interconnection. Appendixes D, E, and F contain a glossary, a list of references, and an index,
respectively.




                                                     1-2
                                   SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


2.       BACKGROUND

A system interconnection is defined as the direct connection of two or more IT systems for the purpose of
sharing data and other information resources. Significant benefits that can be realized through a system
interconnection include: reduced operating costs, greater functionality, improved efficiency, and
centralized access to data. Interconnecting IT systems may also strengthen ties among participating
organizations by promoting communication and cooperation.

Organizations choose to interconnect their IT systems for a variety of reasons, depending on their
organizational needs or the requirements of Executive or Congressional mandates. For example,
organizations may interconnect their IT systems to—

     +   Exchange data and information among selected users

     +   Provide customized levels of access to proprietary databases

     +   Collaborate on joint projects

     +   Provide full time communications, 24 hours per day, 7 days per week

     +   Provide online training

     +   Provide secure storage of critical data and backup files.
A system interconnection has three basic components: two IT systems (System A and System B) and the
mechanism by which they are joined (the “pipe” through which data is made available, exchanged, or
passed one-way only). The components are shown in Figure 2-1. In this document, it is assumed that
System A and System B are owned and operated by different organizations.



                                                   “Pipe”
                           System                                       System
                             A                                            B




                                    Figure 2-1. Interconnection Components

Organizations can connect their IT systems using a dedicated line that is owned by one of the
organizations or is leased from a third party (e.g., an Integrated Services Digital Network [ISDN], T1, or
T3 line). The private or leased line is the “pipe” that connects the IT systems. In many cases, this
solution is expensive, but it can provide a high level of security for the interconnected systems, because
the line may be breached only through a direct physical intrusion.

A less expensive alternative is to connect systems over a public network (e.g., the Internet), using a
virtual private network (VPN). A VPN is a data network that enables two or more parties to
communicate securely across a public network by creating a private connection, or “tunnel,” between
them. This replaces the need to rely on privately owned or leased lines. Data transmitted over a public
network can be intercepted by unauthorized parties, however, necessitating the use of authentication and
encryption to ensure data confidentiality and integrity. Alternately, some organizations pass data over a


                                                     2-1
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


public network without encryption, and instead rely solely on authentication, especially if the data is
publicly available or of low value. The decision to pass data over a public network should be based on an
assessment of the associated risks. NIST Special Publication 800-30, Risk Management Guide for
Information Technology Systems, provides guidance on conducting risk assessments.

There are varying levels of a system interconnection. As with any form of system access, the extent to
which a party may access data and information resources is dependent on its mission and security needs.
Accordingly, some organizations may choose to establish a limited interconnection, whereby users are
restricted to a single application or file location, with rules governing access. Other organizations may
establish a broader interconnection, enabling users to access multiple applications or databases. Still
other organizations may establish an interconnection that permits full transparency and access across their
respective enterprises.

Despite the advantages of an interconnection, interconnecting IT systems can expose the participating
organizations to risk. If the interconnection is not properly designed, security failures could compromise
the connected systems and the data that they store, process, or transmit. Similarly, if one of the connected
systems is compromised, the interconnection could be used as a conduit to compromise the other system
and its data. The potential for compromise is underscored by the fact that, in most cases, the participating
organizations have little or no control over the operation and management of the other party’s system.

It is critical, therefore, that both parties learn as much as possible about the risks associated with the
planned or current interconnection and the security controls that they can implement to mitigate those
risks. It also is critical that they establish an agreement between themselves regarding the management,
operation, and use of the interconnection and that they formally document this agreement. The agreement
should be reviewed and approved by appropriate senior staff from each organization.

Federal policy requires federal agencies to establish interconnection agreements. Specifically, OMB
Circular A-130, Appendix III, requires agencies to obtain written management authorization before
connecting their IT systems to other systems, based on an acceptable level of risk. The written
authorization should define the rules of behavior and controls that must be maintained for the system
interconnection, and it should be included in the organization’s system security plan.




                                                    2-2
                                      SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


3.      PLANNING A SYSTEM INTERCONNECTION

The process of connecting two or more IT systems should begin with a planning phase, in which the
participating organizations perform preliminary activities and examine all relevant technical, security, and
administrative issues. The purpose of the planning phase is to ensure that the interconnection will operate
as efficiently and securely as possible. This section discusses recommended steps for planning a system
interconnection, as shown in Figure 3-1.


                       Step 1:
                                                          Step 2:                              Step 3:
                   Establish Joint
                                                   Define Business Case                     Perform C&A
                   Planning Team




                 Step 4: Determine                   Step 5: Document                         Step 6:
                  Interconnection                     Interconnection                   Approve or Reject
                   Requirements                          Agreement                       Interconnection




                                   Figure 3-1. Steps to Plan a System Interconnection

3.1     Step 1: Establish a Joint Planning Team

Each organization is responsible for ensuring the security of its respective systems and data. Essential to
this goal is a well-coordinated approach to interconnectivity, including regular communications between
the organizations throughout the life cycle of the interconnection. Therefore, the organizations should
consider establishing a joint planning team composed of appropriate managerial and technical staff,
including program managers, security officers, system administrators, network administrators, and system
architects.1

The joint planning team could be part of an existing forum or it could be created specifically for the
planned interconnection. Regardless of how it is formed, the team must have the commitment and
support of the system and data owners and other senior managers. The team would be responsible for
coordinating all aspects of the planning process and ensuring that it had clear direction and sufficient
resources. The planning team also could remain active beyond the planning phase, to serve as a forum for
future discussions about issues involving the interconnection.

In addition, members of the planning team should coordinate with their colleagues who are responsible
for IT capital planning, configuration management, and related activities. In most cases, the
interconnection will be a component of each organization's network. By coordinating the planning of the
interconnection with related activities, the organizations can reduce redundancy and promote efficiency.

3.2     Step 2: Define the Business Case

Both organizations should work together to define the purpose of the interconnection, determine how it
will support their respective mission requirements, and identify potential costs and risks. Defining the

1
      In some cases, the planning team could comprise a “core” of selected individuals who would consult with functional experts
      and specialists on an “as-needed” basis during the planning process.


                                                              3-1
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


business case will establish the basis of the interconnection and facilitate the planning process. Factors
that should be considered are likely costs (e.g., staffing, equipment, and facilities), expected benefits (e.g.,
improved efficiency, centralized access to data), and potential risks (e.g., technical, legal, and financial).

As part of this process, both organizations should examine privacy issues related to data that will be
exchanged or passed over the interconnection and determine whether such use is restricted under current
statutes, regulations, or policies. Examples of data that might be restricted include personally identifiable
information such as names and social security numbers, or confidential business information such as
contractor bid rates and trade secrets. Each organization should consult with its Privacy Officer or Legal
Counsel to determine whether such information may be shared or transferred. Permission to exchange or
transfer data should be documented, along with a commitment to protect such data.

3.3       Step 3: Perform Certification and Accreditation

Before interconnecting their information systems, each organization should ensure that its respective
system is properly certified and accredited in accordance with federal certification and accreditation
(C&A) guidelines. Certification involves testing and evaluating the technical and nontechnical security
features of the system to determine the extent to which it meets a set of specified security requirements.
Accreditation is the official approval by a Designated Approving Authority (DAA) or other authorizing
management official that the system may operate for a specific purpose using a defined set of safeguards
at an acceptable level of risk.

The C&A process is applicable for both emerging systems and those already in production. It involves a
series of security-related activities, including developing a system security plan, conducting a risk
assessment, preparing a contingency plan, and conducting a security review. See NIST Special
Publication 800-12, An Introduction to Computer Security: The NIST Handbook, for guidance on
performing a C&A.

3.4       Step 4: Determine Interconnection Requirements

The joint planning team should identify and examine all relevant technical, security, and administrative
issues surrounding the proposed interconnection. This information may be used to develop an
Interconnection Security Agreement (ISA) and a Memorandum of Understanding or Agreement
(MOU/A) (or an equivalent document[s]).2 This information also may be used to develop an
implementation plan for establishing the interconnection.

The joint planning team should consider the following issues:

      +    Level and Method of Interconnection: Define the level of interconnectivity that will be
           established between the IT systems, ranging from limited connectivity (limited data exchange) to
           enterprise-level connectivity (active sharing of data and applications). In addition, describe the
           method used to connect the systems (dedicated line or VPN).

      +    Impact on Existing Infrastructure and Operations: Determine whether the network or computer
           infrastructure currently used by both organizations is sufficient to support the interconnection, or
           whether additional components are required (e.g., communication lines, routers, switches,
           servers, and software). If additional components are required, determine the potential impact that
           installing and using them might have on the existing infrastructure, if any. In addition, determine
           the potential impact the interconnection could have on current operations, including increases in
2
      Rather than develop an ISA and MOU/A, the organizations may choose to incorporate this information into a formal
      contract, especially if the interconnection is to be established between a federal agency and a commercial organization.


                                                                3-2
                                     SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


         data traffic; new training requirements; and new demands on system administration, security, and
         maintenance.

    +    Hardware Requirements: Identify hardware that will be needed to support the interconnection,
         including communications lines, routers, firewalls, hubs, switch, servers, and computer
         workstations. Determine whether existing hardware is sufficient, or whether additional
         components are required, especially if future growth is anticipated. If new hardware is required,
         select products that ensure interoperability.

    +    Software Requirements: Identify software that will be needed to support the interconnection,
         including software for firewalls, servers, and computer workstations. Determine whether existing
         software is sufficient, or whether additional software is required. If new software is required,
         select products that ensure interoperability.

    +    Data Sensitivity: Identify the sensitivity level of data or information resources that will be made
         available, exchanged, or passed one-way only across the interconnection. Identifying data
         sensitivity is critical for determining the security controls that should be used to protect the
         connected systems and data. Examples of sensitive data include financial data, personal
         information, and proprietary business data. See NIST Special Publication 800-18, Guide for
         Developing Security Plans for Information Technology Systems, for further guidance.

    +    User Community: Define the community of users who will access, exchange, or receive data
         across the interconnection. Determine whether users must possess certain characteristics
         corresponding to data sensitivity levels, such as employment status or nationality requirements,
         and whether background checks and security clearances are required.3 Devise an approach for
         compiling and managing the profiles of all users who will have access to the interconnection,
         including user identification, workstation addresses, workstation type, operating system, and any
         other relevant information. Each organization should use this information to develop and
         maintain a comprehensive database of its users.

    +    Services and Applications: Identify the information services that will be provided over the
         interconnection by each organization and the applications associated with those services, if
         appropriate. Examples of services include e-mail, file transfer protocol (FTP), RADIUS,
         Kerberos, database query, file query, and general computational services.

    +    Security Controls: Identify security controls that will be implemented to protect the
         confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the connected systems and the data that will pass
         between them. Controls can be selected from the examples provided in Section 4 or from other
         sources. Controls should be appropriate for the systems that will be connected and the
         environment in which the interconnection will operate.

    +    Segregation of Duties: Determine whether the management or execution of certain duties should
         be divided between two or more individuals. Examples of duties that might be segregated include
         auditing, managing user profiles, and maintaining equipment. Segregation of duties reduces the
         risk that a single individual could cause harm to the connected systems and data, either
         accidentally or deliberately.

    +    Incident Reporting and Response: Establish procedures to report and respond to anomalous and
         suspicious activity that is detected by either technology or staff. Determine when and how to

3
    If an interconnection is to be established between agencies representing different levels of government (e.g., federal and
    state, federal and local), each party should be cognizant of the other’s rules governing background checks and security
    clearances.


                                                              3-3
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


       notify each other about security incidents that could affect the interconnection. Identify the types
       of information that will be reported, including the cause of the incident, affected data or
       programs, and actual or potential impact. In addition, identify types of incidents that require a
       coordinated response, and determine how to coordinate response activities. It might be
       appropriate to develop a joint incident response plan for this purpose. For more information, see
       NIST Special Publication 800-3, Establishing a Computer Security Incidence Response
       Capability (CSIRC), and Federal Computer Incident Response Center (FedCIRC) publications.

   +   Contingency Planning: Each organization should have a contingency plan(s) to respond to and
       recover from disasters and other disruptive contingencies that could affect its IT system, ranging
       from the failure of system components to the loss of computing facilities. Determine how to
       notify each other of such contingencies, the extent to which the organizations will assist each
       other, and the terms under which assistance will be provided. Identify emergency points of
       contact (POC). Determine whether to incorporate redundancy into components supporting the
       interconnection, including redundant interconnection points, and how to retrieve data backups.
       Coordinate disaster response training, testing, and exercises. See NIST Special Publication 800-
       34, Contingency Planning Guide for Information Technology Systems, for more information.

   +   Data Element Naming and Ownership: Determine whether the data element naming schemes
       used by both organizations are compatible, or whether new databases must be normalized so the
       organizations can use data passed over the interconnection. In addition, determine whether
       ownership of data is transferred from the transmitting party to the receiving party, or whether the
       transmitting party retains ownership and the receiver becomes the custodian. As part of this
       effort, determine how transferred data will be stored, whether data may be re-used, and how data
       will be destroyed. In addition, determine how to identify and resolve potential data element
       naming conflicts.

   +   Data Backup: Determine whether data or information that is passed across the interconnection
       must be backed up and stored. If backups are required, identify the types of data that will be
       backed up, how frequently backups will be conducted (daily, weekly, or monthly), and whether
       backups will be performed by one or both parties. Also, determine how to perform backups, and
       how to link backups to contingency plan procedures. Critical data should be backed up regularly,
       stored in a secure off-site location to prevent loss or damage, and retained for a period approved
       by both parties. Similarly, audit logs should be copied, stored in a secure location, and retained
       for a period approved by both parties.

   +   Change Management: Determine how to coordinate the planning, design, and implementation of
       changes that could affect the connected systems or data, such as upgrading hardware or software,
       or adding services. Establish a forum with appropriate staff from each organization to review
       proposed changes to the interconnection, as appropriate. Coordinating change management
       activities will reduce the potential for implementing changes that could disrupt the availability or
       integrity of data, or introduce vulnerabilities.

   +   Rules of Behavior: Develop rules of behavior that clearly delineate the responsibilities and
       expected behavior of all personnel who will be authorized to access the interconnection. The
       rules should be in writing, and they should state the consequences of inconsistent behavior or
       noncompliance. The rules should be covered in a security training and awareness program.

   +   Security Training and Awareness: Define a security training and awareness program for all
       authorized personnel who will be involved in managing, using, and/or operating the
       interconnection. The program may be incorporated into current security training and awareness
       activities. Identify training requirements, including frequency and scheduling, and assign


                                                   3-4
                                      SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


           responsibility for conducting training and awareness activities. Design training to ensure that
           personnel are familiar with IT security policy, procedures, and the rules of behavior associated
           with the interconnection. Require users to sign an acknowledgement form indicating that they
           understand their security responsibilities, if appropriate. If shared applications are used, ensure
           users know how to use them properly. If the interconnection is used to exchange or transfer
           sensitive data, ensure that users understand special requirements for handling such data, if
           required. See NIST Special Publication 800-50, Building an Information Technology Security
           Awareness and Training Program, for guidance.

      +    Roles and Responsibilities: Identify personnel who will be responsible for establishing,
           maintaining, or managing the interconnection, including managers, system administrators,
           application designers, auditors, security staff, and specialists from such fields as insurance and
           risk management. Choose personnel who have appropriate subject matter expertise. If
           contractors are involved, one or both organizations may be required to develop a nondisclosure
           agreement to safeguard the confidentiality and integrity of exchanged data.

      +    Scheduling: Develop a preliminary schedule for all activities involved in planning, establishing,
           and maintaining the interconnection. Also, determine the schedule and conditions for terminating
           or reauthorizing the interconnection. For example, both parties might agree to review the
           interconnection every 12 months to determine whether to reauthorize it for continued operation.

      +    Costs and Budgeting: Identify the expected costs required to plan, establish, and maintain the
           interconnection. Identify all associated costs, including labor, hardware, software,
           communications lines, applications, facilities, physical security, training, and testing. Also,
           identify costs for certifying and accrediting the interconnection after it is established, if
           appropriate. Develop a comprehensive budget, and determine how costs will be apportioned
           between the parties, if required.
3.5       Step 5: Document Interconnection Agreement

The joint planning team should document an agreement governing the interconnection and the terms
under which the organizations will abide by the agreement, based on the team’s review of all relevant
technical, security, and administrative issues (Section 3.4 above). Two documents may be developed: an
ISA and an MOU/A. These documents are discussed below.4

Because the ISA and the MOU/A may contain sensitive information, they should be stored in a secure
location to protect against theft, damage, or destruction. If copies are stored electronically, they should be
protected from unauthorized disclosure or modification. An ISA development guide and sample are
provided in Appendix A, and an MOU/A development guide and sample are provided in Appendix B.

3.5.1      Substep 1: Develop an Interconnection Security Agreement

The ISA is a security document that specifies the technical and security requirements for establishing,
operating, and maintaining the interconnection. It also supports the MOU/A between the organizations.
Specifically, the ISA documents the requirements for connecting the IT systems, describes the security
controls that will be used to protect the systems and data, contains a topological drawing of the
interconnection, and provides a signature line.



4
      In some cases, the organizations may decide to use established organizational procedures for documenting the agreement, in
      lieu of an ISA and MOU/A.


                                                              3-5
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


3.5.2      Substep 2: Establish a Memorandum of Understanding (or Agreement)

The MOU/A documents the terms and conditions for sharing data and information resources in a secure
manner. Specifically, the MOU/A defines the purpose of the interconnection; identifies relevant
authorities; specifies the responsibilities of both organizations; and defines the terms of agreement,
including apportionment of costs and the timeline for terminating or reauthorizing the interconnection.
The MOU/A should not include technical details on how the interconnection is established or maintained;
that is the function of the ISA.

3.6       Step 6: Approve or Reject System Interconnection

The joint planning team should submit the ISA and the MOU/A to the DAA or other authorizing
management official of each organization, requesting approval for the interconnection. Upon receipt, the
DAAs should review the ISA, the MOU/A, and any other relevant documentation or activities, including
those addressed in Section 4. Based on this review, the DAAs should decide on one of the following:

      +    Approve the interconnection

      +    Grant interim approval

      +    Reject the interconnection.
If the DAAs (or other authorizing officials) accept the ISA and the MOU/A, they should sign and date the
documents, thereby approving the interconnection. The documents should then be given to an appropriate
security officer from each organization to retain. A signed copy of the documents also should be
forwarded to the appropriate program manager or any other officials responsible for interconnections
within each organization.

One or both DAAs may decide to grant an interim approval. Interim approval may be granted if the
planned interconnection does not meet the requirements stated in the ISA, but mission criticality requires
that the interconnection must be established and cannot be delayed. The DAA(s) should provide a signed
letter to the respective security officers and to the other DAA, specifying the tasks that must be completed
before full approval will be granted, including the implementation of additional security controls, if
required. In addition, the DAA(s) should specify timelines for completing the tasks, although ideally the
tasks should be completed before the interconnection is operational. The joint planning team should then
work to meet the requirements specified by the DAA(s).

If one or both DAAs reject the interconnection, the joint planning team should return to the planning
process. In this situation, the DAA(s) should provide a signed letter to the respective program managers
and to the other DAA, specifying the reason(s) for rejecting the planned interconnection and proposing
solutions. The DAA(s) also should meet with the joint planning team to discuss and agree on the
proposed solutions and timelines for correcting specified deficiencies, so approval may be granted.




                                                    3-6
                                   SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


4.        ESTABLISHING A SYSTEM INTERCONNECTION

After the system interconnection is planned and approved, it may be implemented. This section provides
recommended steps for establishing the system interconnection, as shown in Figure 4-1.



                  Step 1:                           Step 2:                           Step 3:
                 Develop                           Execute                           Activate
            Implementation Plan               Implementation Plan                Interconnection



                             Figure 4-1. Steps to Establish a System Interconnection

4.1       Step 1: Develop an Implementation Plan

To ensure that the IT systems are connected properly and securely, the joint planning team should
develop a System Interconnection Implementation Plan. The purpose of the plan is to centralize all
aspects of the interconnection effort in one document and to clarify how technical requirements specified
in the ISA will be implemented. A well-developed implementation plan will greatly improve the
likelihood that the interconnection will operate successfully and securely.

At a minimum, the implementation plan should—

      +    Describe the IT systems that will be connected

      +    Identify the sensitivity or classification level of data that will be made available, exchanged, or
           passed one-way across the interconnection

      +    Identify personnel who will establish and maintain the interconnection, and specify their
           responsibilities

      +    Identify implementation tasks and procedures

      +    Identify and describe security controls that will be used to protect the confidentiality, integrity,
           and availability of the connected systems and data (see Section 4.2.1 for sample security
           controls).

      +    Provide test procedures and measurement criteria to ensure that the interconnection operates
           properly and securely

      +    Specify training requirements for users, including a training schedule

      +    Cite or include all relevant documentation, such as system security plans, design specifications,
           and standard operating procedures.
A guide for developing a System Interconnection Implementation Plan is provided in Appendix C.

4.2       Step 2: Execute the Implementation Plan

After the implementation plan is developed, it should be reviewed and approved by senior members of the
planning team. Pending approval, it may then be executed. A list of recommended tasks for establishing



                                                        4-1
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


an interconnection is provided below. Detailed procedures associated with each task should be described
in the implementation plan.

4.2.1   Substep 1: Implement or Configure Security Controls

If security controls are not in place or they are configured improperly, the process of establishing the
interconnection could expose the IT systems to access by unauthorized personnel. Therefore, the first
step is to implement appropriate security controls or to configure existing controls, as specified in the ISA
and the implementation plan. Security controls may include the following:

    +   Firewalls: Firewalls determine whether data packets are permitted into a network, and they
        restrict access to specific resources. Install firewalls to protect internal networks and other
        resources from unauthorized access across the interconnection, or configure existing firewalls
        accordingly. If the interconnection involves the use of servers, host them in a separately
        protected “demilitarized zone” (DMZ), which may be accomplished by installing two firewalls:
        one on the external line and one at the connection to internal networks. (Alternately, a firewall
        could be installed on the external line and a security portal installed at the internal connection.)
        Ensure firewall ports are configured properly and change all default passwords. See NIST
        Special Publication 800-41, Guidelines on Firewalls and Firewall Policy, for more information.

    +   Intrusion Detection: An intrusion detection system (IDS) detects security breaches by looking for
        anomalies in normal activities, by looking for patterns of activity that are associated with
        intrusions or insider misuse, or both. One or both organizations should implement an IDS (or
        configure existing IDSs) to detect undesirable or malicious activity that could affect the
        interconnection or data that pass over it. A combination of network-based and host-based IDSs
        may be used, if appropriate. Configure alert mechanisms to notify system administrators or
        security officers when intrusions or unusual activities are detected. See NIST Special Publication
        800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), for more information.

    +   Auditing: Install or configure mechanisms to record activities occurring across the
        interconnection, including application processes and user activities. Activities that should be
        recorded include event type, date and time of event, user identification, workstation identification,
        the success or failure of access attempts, and security actions taken by system administrators or
        security officers. Audit logs should have read-only access, and only authorized personnel should
        have access to the logs. In addition, logs should be stored in a secure location to protect against
        theft and damage, and they should be retained for a period approved by both parties.

    +   Identification and Authentication: Identification and authentication is used to prevent
        unauthorized personnel from entering an IT system. Implement strong mechanisms to identify
        and authenticate users to ensure that they are authorized to access the interconnection.
        Mechanisms that may be used include user identification and passwords, digital certificates,
        authentication tokens, biometrics, and smart cards.

        If passwords are used, they should be at least eight characters long, have a mixture of alphabetic
        and numeric characters, and be changed at predetermined intervals. Master password files should
        be encrypted and protected from unauthorized access. If digital signatures are used, the
        technology must conform to Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 186-2, Digital
        Signature Standard (DSS).5

        Depending on data sensitivity, organizations may permit users to access the interconnection after
5
    This requirement applies only to federal agencies.


                                                         4-2
                           SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


    they have authenticated to their local domain, reducing the need for multiple passwords or other
    mechanisms. Applications operating across the interconnection could rely on authentication
    information from the user’s local domain, using a proxy authentication mechanism.

+   Logical Access Controls: Logical access controls are mechanisms used to designate users who
    have access to system resources and the types of transactions and functions they are permitted to
    perform. Use access control lists (ACL) and access rules to specify the access privileges of
    authorized personnel, including the level of access and the types of transactions and functions that
    are permitted (e.g., read, write, execute, delete, create, and search). Hardware and software often
    are configured with ACLs, or the ACLs may be administered offline and then distributed to
    routers and other devices. Configure access rules to grant appropriate access privileges to
    authorized personnel, based on their roles or job functions. Ensure only system administrators
    have access to the controls.

    In addition, install a log-on warning banner notifying unauthorized users that they have accessed
    a federal computer system and unauthorized use can be punishable by fines or imprisonment.
    Ensure that the terms of the warning have been approved by each organization’s Legal Counsel.
    A user’s acceptance of the warning should constitute consent to monitoring. See NIST Special
    Publication 800-18, Guide for Developing Security Plans for Information Technology Systems,
    for more information on warning banners.

+   Virus Scanning: Data and information that pass from one IT system to the other should be
    scanned with antivirus software to detect and eliminate malicious code, including viruses, worms,
    and Trojan horses. Install antivirus software on all servers and computer workstations linked to
    the interconnection. Ensure the software is automatically updated and properly maintained with
    current virus definitions. In addition, incorporate virus scanning into user training to ensure that
    users understand how to scan computers, file downloads, and e-mail attachments, if appropriate.
    Develop procedures and assign responsibilities for responding to and recovering from malicious
    code attacks.

+   Encryption: Encryption is used to ensure that data cannot be read or modified by unauthorized
    users. When used properly, encryption will protect the confidentiality and integrity of data during
    transmission and storage, and it may be used for authentication and nonrepudiation. Encryption
    may be implemented in devices such as routers, switches, firewalls, servers, and computer
    workstations. Configure devices to apply the appropriate level of encryption required for data
    that pass over the interconnection. If required, implement encryption mechanisms (e.g., digital
    signatures) to authenticate users to the interconnection and to shared applications, and to provide
    nonrepudiation. Federal agencies must use FIPS-approved algorithms and cryptographic modules
    if they use cryptographic methods.

+   Physical and Environmental Security: Physical security addresses the physical protection of
    computer hardware and software. Place hardware and software supporting the interconnection,
    including interconnection points, in a secure location that is protected from unauthorized access,
    interference, or damage. Ensure that environmental controls are in place to protect against
    hazards such as fire, water, and excessive heat and humidity. In addition, place computer
    workstations in secure areas to protect them from damage, loss, theft, or unauthorized physical
    access. Consider using access badges, cipher locks, or biometric devices to control access to
    secure areas. Also, consider using biometric devices to prevent unauthorized use of workstations.
    For guidance, see the following NIST Special Publications: 800-12, An Introduction to Computer
    Security: The NIST Handbook, 800-30, Risk Management Guide for Information Technology
    Systems, and 800-27, Engineering Principles for Information Technology Security (A Baseline for
    Achieving Security).


                                                4-3
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


4.2.2    Substep 2: Install or Configure Hardware and Software

After security controls are installed or configured, it may be necessary to install new hardware and
software to establish the interconnection, or to configure existing hardware and software for this purpose,
if appropriate. Place hardware and software in secure areas that are configured with proper environmental
controls. The following equipment might be required:

    +    Communications Line: If a dedicated line is used for the interconnection, ensure that the line is
         connected to the appropriate physical site at each organization.

    +    VPN: Install VPN software on servers and local workstations, and configure it appropriately.

    +    Routers and Switches: Install routers or switches to connect to the communications line between
         the IT systems, or configure existing devices.

    +    Hubs: Install hubs to join multiple computers into a single network segment, if required.

    +    Servers: Install appropriate servers to support services provided across the interconnection, such
         as database, Web, and application servers. If existing servers are used, determine whether the
         hardware should be upgraded to support the interconnection, and whether the latest software and
         security patches have been applied.

    +    Computer Workstations: Configure computer workstations by providing a menu option or a link
         to enable authorized users to invoke the interconnection. Install appropriate client software, if
         required.
4.2.3    Substep 3: Integrate Applications

Integrate applications or protocols for services that are provided across the interconnection. Examples
include word processing, database applications, e-mail, Web browsers, application servers, authentication
servers, domain servers, development tools, editing programs, and communications programs. If using
Web-based applications, consider the possible security ramifications of integrating the use of Java,
JavaScript, ActiveX, and cookies. See the following NIST Special Publications for more information:
800-27, Engineering Principles for Information Technology Security (A Baseline for Achieving Security),
800-28, Guidelines on Active Content and Mobile Code, and 800-33, Underlying Technical Models for
Information Technology Security.

4.2.4    Substep 4: Conduct Operational and Security Testing

Conduct a series of tests to ensure equipment operates properly and there are no obvious ways for
unauthorized users to circumvent or defeat security controls.6 Test the interface between applications
across the interconnection, and simulate data traffic at planned activity levels to verify correct translation
at the receiving end(s). Test security controls under realistic conditions. If possible, conduct testing in an
isolated, nonoperational environment to avoid affecting the IT systems.

Document the results of the testing and compare them with a set of predetermined operational and
security standards approved by both organizations. Determine whether the results meet a mutually agreed
level of acceptable risk and whether other actions are required. Correct weaknesses or problems and
document the actions taken. Retest the interconnection to ensure that weaknesses or problems are
eliminated and that new flaws have not been introduced.


6
    Operational and security testing may be performed as part of recertification and reaccreditation discussed in Section 4.2.7.


                                                              4-4
                                SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


4.2.5   Substep 5: Conduct Security Training and Awareness

Conduct security training and awareness for all authorized personnel who will be involved in managing,
using, and/or operating the interconnection. Provide training and awareness for new users and refresher
training for all users periodically. Distribute the rules of behavior to all personnel who will be authorized
to access the interconnection. Require them to sign an acknowledgement form confirming that they
understand the rules before granting them authorization to access the interconnection, according to
organizational policy. In addition, ensure that the staff know how to report suspicious or prohibited
activity, and how to request assistance if they encounter problems.

4.2.6   Substep 6: Update System Security Plans

Both organizations should update their system security plans and related documents to reflect the changed
security environment in which their respective system operates. In addition, consider conducting mutual
reviews of those sections of the updated plans that are relevant to the interconnection. The details for
conducting a mutual review should be addressed in the MOU/A.

It is recommended the security plans include the following information regarding the system
interconnection (and other interconnections, if appropriate):

    +   Names of interconnected systems

    +   Organization owning the other systems

    +   Type of interconnection

    +   Short discussion of major concerns or considerations in determining interconnection

    +   Name and title of authorizing management official(s)

    +   Date of authorization

    +   System of record, if applicable (Privacy Act data)

    +   Sensitivity level of each system

    +   Interaction among systems

    +   Hardware inventory

    +   Software inventory

    +   Security concerns and rules of behavior governing the interconnection.
See NIST Special Publication 800-18, Guide for Developing Security Plans for Information Technology
Systems, for more information.

4.2.7   Substep 7: Perform Recertification and Reaccreditation

Establishing an interconnection may represent a significant change to the connected systems. Before
proceeding further, each organization should consider recertifying and reaccrediting its respective system
to verify that security protection remains acceptable. Recertification and reaccreditation involve the same
activities described in Section 3.3. A full C&A might not be necessary, however, if the system continues



                                                     4-5
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


to operate within an acceptable level of risk; instead, an abbreviated C&A might be sufficient. See NIST
Special Publications 800-12, An Introduction to Computer Security: The NIST Handbook, for guidance.

4.3   Step 3: Activate the Interconnection

Activate the interconnection for use by both parties, following prescribed guidelines. It is recommended
that one or both organizations closely monitor the interconnection for a period of at least three months to
ensure that it operates properly and securely. Analyze audit logs carefully and frequently, and monitor
the types of assistance requested by users. Document any weaknesses or problems that occur and correct
them.




                                                    4-6
                                  SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


5.        MAINTAINING A SYSTEM INTERCONNECTION

After the interconnection is established, it must be actively maintained to ensure that it operates properly
and securely. This section describes the following recommended activities for maintaining the
interconnection:

      +    Maintain clear lines of communication

      +    Maintain equipment

      +    Manage user profiles

      +    Conduct security reviews

      +    Analyze audit logs

      +    Report and respond to security incidents

      +    Coordinate contingency planning activities

      +    Perform change management

      +    Maintain system security plans.
5.1       Maintain Clear Lines of Communication

It is critical that both organizations maintain clear lines of communication and communicate regularly.
Open lines of communication help to ensure that the interconnection is properly maintained and that
security controls remain effective. Open communications also facilitate change management activities by
making it easy for both sides to notify each other about planned system changes that could affect the
interconnection. Finally, maintaining clear lines of communication enables both sides to promptly notify
each other of security incidents and system disruptions and helps them to conduct coordinated responses,
if necessary.

Communications should be conducted between designated personnel using approved procedures, as
specified in the ISA. Information that should be shared includes the following:

      +    Initial agreements and changes to agreements

      +    Changes in designated management and technical personnel

      +    Activities related to establishing and maintaining the interconnection

      +    Change management activities that could affect the interconnection

      +    Security incidents that could affect the connected systems and data

      +    Disasters and other contingencies that disrupt one or both of the connected systems

      +    Termination of the interconnection

      +    Planned restoration of the interconnection.




                                                         5-1
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


Information may be exchanged verbally or in writing, depending on the nature of the communications.
However, any activities that could change, modify, or adjust one or both of the connected systems should
always be communicated in writing.

5.2   Maintain Equipment

The organizations should agree on who will maintain the equipment used to operate the interconnection,
to ensure its continued integrity and availability. Equipment should be maintained at regular service
intervals and in accordance with manufacturer specifications. Only authorized personnel should be
allowed to service and repair equipment, according to established organizational policy. All maintenance
activities and corrective actions should be documented, and the records should be stored in a secure
location. Finally, organizations should notify each other before performing maintenance activities,
including scheduled outages.

5.3   Manage User Profiles

Both organizations should actively manage user profiles. If a user resigns or changes job responsibilities,
the appropriate organization should update the user’s profile to prevent access to data or information that
is no longer appropriate. Establish procedures for investigating, disabling, and terminating access to users
who do not actively access the interconnection over a specific period of time. For example, access
privileges for users who do not access the interconnection after a predetermined number of days should be
disabled, pending confirmation that they still require access. Privileges for users who do not access the
interconnection after a (longer) predetermined period should be terminated. Such measures help prevent
intruders from exploiting inactive accounts to masquerade as legitimate users.

5.4   Conduct Security Reviews

One or both organizations should review the security controls for the interconnection at least annually or
whenever a significant change occurs to ensure they are operating properly and are providing appropriate
levels of protection. A variety of security assessment tools are available commercially that can be run
against firewalls and other controls to identify administrative and configuration vulnerabilities and other
security risks. Penetration tests also should be conducted. See NIST Special Publication 800-42,
Guidelines on Network Security Testing, for a methodology for using network-based tools to test IT
systems for vulnerabilities.

Security reviews may be conducted by designated audit authorities of one or both organizations, or by an
independent third party. Both organizations should agree on the rigor and frequency of reviews as well as
a reporting process. For example, both organizations should examine the results of security reviews to
identify areas requiring attention. Security risks or problems should be corrected or addressed in a timely
manner. Corrective actions should be documented, and the records should be stored in a secure location.

5.5   Analyze Audit Logs

One or both organizations should analyze audit logs at predetermined intervals to detect and track unusual
or suspicious activities across the interconnection that might indicate intrusions or internal misuse. Given
the voluminous nature of audit logs, the logs should be kept at a manageable size by setting logging levels
appropriately. Automated tools should be used to scan for anomalies, unusual patterns, and known attack
signatures, and to alert a system administrator if a threat is detected. In addition, an experienced system
administrator (or more than one, if segregation of duties is applied) should periodically review the logs to
detect patterns of suspicious activity that scanning tools might not recognize. Audit logs should be
retained for a period approved by both parties.



                                                    5-2
                                SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


5.6   Report and Respond to Security Incidents

Both organizations should notify each other of intrusions, attacks, or internal misuse, so the other party
can take steps to determine whether its system has been compromised. Both organizations should take
appropriate steps to isolate and respond to such incidents, in accordance with their respective incident
response procedures. Actions that may be taken include shutting down a computer, disabling an account,
reconfiguring a router or firewall, or shutting down the system. If the incident involves personnel from
one or both organizations, disciplinary actions may be required.

In some cases, both parties should coordinate their incident response activities, especially if a major
security breach occurs. If the incident was an attack or an intrusion attempt, appropriate law enforcement
authorities should be notified, and all attempts should be made to preserve evidence. All security
incidents, along with the reporting and response actions taken, should be documented. See NIST Special
Publication 800-3, Establishing a Computer Security Incidence Response Capability (CSIRC), and
FedCIRC publications for more information.

5.7   Coordinate Contingency Planning Activities

Both organizations should coordinate contingency planning training, testing, and exercises to minimize
the impact of disasters and other contingencies that could damage the connected systems or jeopardize the
confidentiality and integrity of shared data. Special attention should be given to emergency alert and
notification; damage assessment; and response and recovery, including data retrieval. The organizations
should consider developing joint procedures based on existing contingency plans, if appropriate. Finally,
the organizations should notify each other about changes to emergency POC information (primary and
alternate), including changes in staffing, addresses, telephone and fax numbers, and e-mail addresses. See
NIST Special Publication 800-34, Contingency Planning Guide for Information Technology Systems, for
more information.

5.8   Perform Change Management

Effective change management is critical to ensure the interconnection is properly maintained and secured.
Each organization should establish a change control board (CCB), or a similar body, to review and
approve planned changes to its respective system, such as upgrading software or adding services.

The decision to upgrade or modify a system should be based on the security requirements specified in the
ISA and a determination that the change will not adversely affect the interconnection. Accordingly,
planned changes should be tested in an isolated, nonoperational environment to avoid affecting the IT
systems, if possible. In addition, the other party should be notified in writing of the changes, and it
should be involved in this process. After approving a change, the CCB would be responsible for
managing and tracking the change to ensure it did not harm the interconnection, either by disrupting
service or by introducing vulnerabilities.

If a planned change is designed specifically for the interconnection, both parties should establish a joint
CCB or a similar body to review and approve the change. In most cases, such changes are designed to
improve the operation and security of the interconnection, such as by adding new functions, improving
user interfaces, and eliminating (or mitigating) known vulnerabilities. Nevertheless, it is critical that both
organizations carefully review such changes before implementing them and that they manage and track
the changes after they are made. Any vulnerabilities or problems should be corrected in a timely manner.




                                                     5-3
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


5.9   Maintain System Security Plans

Both organizations should update their system security plans and other relevant documentation at least
annually or whenever there is a significant change to their IT systems or to the interconnection. Refer to
NIST Special Publication 800-18, Guide for Developing Security Plans for Information Technology
Systems, for information on updating system security plans.




                                                    5-4
                                      SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


6.        DISCONNECTING A SYSTEM INTERCONNECTION

This section describes the process for terminating the system interconnection. If possible, the
interconnection should be terminated in a methodical manner to avoid disrupting the other party’s IT
system.

6.1       Planned Disconnection

The decision to terminate the interconnection should be made by the system owner with the advice of
appropriate managerial and technical staff. Before terminating the interconnection, the initiating party
should notify the other party in writing, and it should receive an acknowledgment in return. The
notification should describe the reason(s) for the disconnection, provide the proposed timeline for the
disconnection, and identify technical and management staff who will conduct the disconnection.

An organization might have a variety of reasons to terminate an interconnection, including:

      +    Changed business needs

      +    Failed security audits, including increases in risks that rise to unacceptable levels

      +    Inability to abide by the technical specifications of the ISA

      +    Inability to abide by the terms and conditions of the MOU/A

      +    Cost considerations, including increases in the cost of maintaining the interconnection

      +    Changes in system configuration or in the physical location of equipment.
The schedule for terminating the interconnection should permit a reasonable period for internal business
planning so both sides can make appropriate preparations, including notifying affected users and
identifying alternative resources for continuing operations. In addition, managerial and technical staff
from both organizations should coordinate to determine the logistics of the disconnection and the
disposition of shared data, including purging and overwriting sensitive data (data remanence). The
disconnection should be conducted when the impact on users is minimal, based on known activity
patterns. Following the disconnection, each organization should update its system security plan and
related documents to reflect the changed security environment in which its respective system operates.

6.2       Emergency Disconnection

If one or both organizations detect an attack, intrusion attempt, or other contingency that exploits or
jeopardizes the connected systems or their data, it might be necessary to abruptly terminate the
interconnection without providing written notice to the other party. This extraordinary measure should be
taken only in extreme circumstances and only after consultation with appropriate technical staff and
senior management.7

The decision to make an emergency disconnection should be made by the system owner and implemented
by technical staff. If the system owner is unavailable, a predesignated staff member may authorize the
disconnection in accordance with written criteria that stipulate the conditions under which this authority is
exercised.

7
      Each organization should consult with its Legal Counsel well in advance of a potential emergency disconnection to address
      issues related to liability, investigation, and evidence preservation.


                                                              6-1
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


The system owner or designee should immediately notify the other party’s emergency contact by
telephone or other verbal method, and receive confirmation of the notification. Both parties should work
together to isolate and investigate the incident, including conducting a damage assessment and reviewing
audit logs and security controls, in accordance with incident response procedures. If the incident was an
attack or an intrusion attempt, law enforcement authorities should be notified, and all attempts should be
made to preserve evidence.

The initiating party should provide a written notification to the other party in a timely manner (e.g.,
within five days). The notification should describe the nature of the incident, explain why the
interconnection was terminated, describe how the interconnection was terminated, and identify actions
taken to isolate and investigate the incident. In addition, the notification may specify when and under
what conditions the interconnection may be restored, if appropriate.

6.3   Restoration of Interconnection

Both organizations may choose to restore the system interconnection after it has been terminated. The
decision to restore the interconnection should be based on the cause and duration of the disconnection.
For example, if the interconnection was terminated because of an attack, intrusion, or other contingency,
both parties should implement appropriate countermeasures to prevent a recurrence of the problem. They
also should modify the ISA and MOU/A to address issues requiring attention, if necessary. Alternately, if
the interconnection has been terminated for more than 90 days, each party should perform a risk
assessment on its respective system, and reexamine all relevant planning and implementation issues,
including developing a new ISA and MOU/A.




                                                   6-2
                              SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


Appendix A—Interconnection Security Agreement

The organizations that own and operate the connected information technology (IT) systems should
develop an Interconnection Security Agreement (ISA) (or an equivalent document) to document the
technical requirements of the interconnection. The ISA also supports a Memorandum of Understanding
or Agreement (MOU/A) between the organizations (see Appendix B). An ISA development guide is
provided below; a sample ISA is depicted in Figure A-1 at the end of this appendix.

A.1       Purpose

The intent of the ISA is to document and formalize the interconnection arrangements between
“Organization A” and “Organization B” and to specify any details that may be required to provide overall
security safeguards for the systems being interconnected. General guidance regarding the contents of an
ISA is provided below; however, an ISA may be tailored by mutual consent of the participating
organizations. A system that is approved by an ISA for interconnection with one organization’s system
should meet the protection requirements equal to, or greater than, those implemented by the other
organization’s system.

A.2       References

The authority for interconnectivity between IT systems is based on Office of Management and Budget
(OMB) Circular A-130 and a signed MOU/A between the two organizations that are establishing the
interconnection.

A.3       Scope

This procedure is effective in the following System Development Life Cycle (SDLC) phases:


      CONCEPTS DEVELOPMENT                           DEPLOYMENT                             √

      DESIGN                                         OPERATIONS                             √

      DEVELOPMENT                              √     DISPOSAL                               √

A.4       Procedure

An ISA is used to support an MOU/A that establishes the requirements for data exchange between two
organizations. The MOU/A is used to document the business and legal requirements necessary to support
the business relations between the two organizations. The MOU/A should not include technical details
regarding how the interconnection is established; that is the function of the ISA. An ISA is a distinct
security-related document that outlines the technical solution and security requirements for the
interconnection. It does not replace an MOU/A. As older MOU/As are updated, they should be changed
to refer to the appropriate ISA covering the connectivity addressed by the MOU/A.

An ISA can be signed only by the two Designated Approval Authorities (DAA) (or other authorizing
management officials) whose names appear in Section 4 of the agreement (see below). The ISA should be
formally signed before the interconnection is declared operational.




                                                   A-1
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


A.5         Contents of an Interconnection Security Agreement

An ISA should contain a cover sheet followed by a document of four numbered sections. The
information presented within those four sections should address the need for the interconnection and the
security controls required and implemented to protect the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the
systems and data. The extent of the information should be sufficient for the two DAAs to make a
prudent decision about approving the interconnection. The four sections are as follows:

      +   Section 1: Interconnection Statement of Requirements

      +   Section 2: Systems Security Considerations

      +   Section 3: Topological Drawing

      +   Section 4: Signatory Authority.
It is difficult to define the required security considerations that may need to be documented without
having detailed knowledge of each system being connected. The items in Section 2 should be included by
mutual consent. Therefore, a technical representative from each organization who understands that
organization’s system should choose which security issues are relevant in Section 2. One system may
have several security requirements that must be documented and that may not apply to the other system.
The technical representative for each organization should have the authority to represent his or her DAA
for defining requirements for the particular ISA.

A.6         Section 1: Interconnection Statement of Requirements

Use this section to document the formal requirement for connecting the two systems. Explain the
rationale for the interconnection to the two DAAs. Enter a one- or two-paragraph statement justifying the
interconnection. Within the information presented, include the following information:

      +   The requirement for the interconnection, including the benefits derived.

      +   The names of the systems being interconnected.

      +   The agency name or organization that initiated the requirement. If the requirement is generated
          by a higher level agency or organization, indicate the name of the organization and the individual,
          if appropriate, that requested the interconnection.
A.7         Section 2: System Security Considerations

Use this section to document the security features that are in place to protect the confidentiality, integrity,
and availability of the data and the systems being interconnected. The technical representative from each
organization should discuss the contents on this section to come to a mutual agreement as to which items
will be included. Both organizations should answer each item, even if only one party is affected by the
item in question. Note that some items are recommended, whereas others are optional. Optional items
affecting only one system should be answered and included.

SUGGESTED ITEMS: (Do not include the title “Suggested Items” in the ISA.) The following items
should be addressed in the ISA:

      +   General Information/Data Description. Describe the information and data that will be made
          available, exchanged, or passed one-way only by the interconnection of the two systems.



                                                     A-2
                                     SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


    +    Services Offered. Describe the nature of the information services (e.g., e-mail, file transfer
         protocol [FTP], database query, file query, general computational services) offered over the
         interconnection by each organization.

    +    Data Sensitivity. Enter the sensitivity level of the information that will be handled through the
         interconnection, including the highest level of sensitivity involved (e.g., Privacy Act, Trade
         Secret Act, Law Enforcement Sensitive, Sensitive-But-Unclassified) and the most restrictive
         protection measures required.

    +    User Community. Describe the “user community” that will be served by the interconnection,
         including their approved access levels and the lowest approval level of any individual who will
         have access to the interconnection. Also, discuss requirements for background investigations and
         security clearances, if appropriate.

    +    Information Exchange Security. Describe all system security technical services pertinent to the
         secure exchange of data between the connected systems.

    +    Rules of Behavior. Summarize the aspects of behavior expected from users who will have access
         to the interconnection. Each system is expected to protect information belonging to the other
         through the implementation of security controls that protect against intrusion, tampering, and
         viruses, among others. Do not enter statements of law or policy. Such statements typically are
         addressed in the MOU/A.

    +    Formal Security Policy. Enter the titles of the formal security policy(ies) that govern each system
         (e.g., “Information Systems Policy and Procedures, Number xxxx” for “Organization A”).

    +    Incident Reporting. Describe the agreements made regarding the reporting of and response to
         information security incidents for both organizations. For example, “Each organization will
         report incidents in accordance to its own (procedure name) procedures.” If no incident reporting
         is performed, so state.

    +    Audit Trail Responsibilities. Describe how the audit trail responsibility will be shared by the
         organizations and what events each organization will log. Specify the length of time that audit
         logs will be retained. If no audit trail is performed, so state.
OTHER ITEMS:8 (Do not include the title “Other Items” in the ISA.) If the technical representatives
determine that any item below is “not applicable,” a statement to that effect may be made in the ISA in
lieu of eliminating the item from the ISA. For example, if there is no dialup connectivity, the appropriate
entry would be “Dialup capability will not be used by either interconnected system.”

    +    Security Parameters. Specify the security parameters exchanged between systems to authenticate
         that the requesting system is the legitimate system and that the class(es) of service requested is
         approved by the ISA. For example, at the system level, if a new service such as e-mail is
         requested without prior coordination, it should be detected, refused, and documented as a possible
         intrusion until the interconnected service is authorized. Also, additional security parameters may
         be required (e.g., personal accountability) to allow the respondent system to determine whether a
         requestor is authorized to receive the information and/or services requested and whether all
         details of the transaction fall within the scope of user services authorized in the ISA.

    +   Operational Security Mode. If both parties use the concept of Protection Levels and Levels-of-
        Concern for Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability based on their implementation common

8
    The organizations may choose to address other relevant items in the ISA, in addition to the suggested items.


                                                             A-3
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


          criteria, enter the values for each as documented for both systems. Optionally, the security mode
          of operations could be documented for both systems.

      +   Training and Awareness. Enter the details of any new or additional security training and
          awareness requirements, and the assignment of responsibility for conducting training and
          awareness throughout the life cycle of the interconnection.

      +   Specific Equipment Restrictions. Describe any revised or new restriction(s) to be placed on
          terminals, including their usage, location, and physical accessibility.

      +   Dialup and Broadband Connectivity. Describe any special considerations for dialup and
          broadband connections to any system in the proposed interconnection, including security risks
          and safeguards used to mitigate those risks. See National Institute of Standards and Technology
          (NIST) Special Publication 800-46, Security Guide for Telecommuting and Broadband
          Communications, for more information.

      +   Security Documentation. Enter the title and general details of each organization’s system security
          plan, including the assignment of responsibilities for developing and accepting the plan, as well
          as any other relevant documentation.
A.8         Section 3: Topological Drawing

The ISA should include a topological drawing illustrating the interconnectivity from one system to the
other system (end-point to end-point). The drawing should include the following:

      +   The title “SECTION 3: TOPOLOGICAL DRAWING.”

      +   All communications paths, circuits, and other components used for the interconnection, from
          “Organization A’s” system to “Organization B’s” system.

      +   The drawing should depict the logical location of all components (e.g., firewalls, routers,
          switches, hubs, servers, encryption devices, and computer workstations).

      +   If required, mark the top and bottom of each page with an appropriate handling requirement, such
          as “FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY” or “FOR INTERNAL USE ONLY.”
A.9         Section 4: Signatory Authority

The ISA should include a signature line. Optionally, this section may include any statements that the two
DAAs desire in order to finalize the ISA. This section should include the following:

      +   The expiration date of the agreement

      +   Periodic review requirements, such as the date of the next review

      +   Other statements as required by the DAAs, if any

      +   The signatures of the DAAs from each organization, and the date of the signatures.




                                                      A-4
                    SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS




                         FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

    INTERCONNECTION SECURITY AGREEMENT


                   Between “Organization A”
                             and
                       “Organization B”




                   (ORGANIZATIONAL SEAL[S] HERE)




                              (DATE HERE)

(Organization A)                                         (Organization B)




                         FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY




                            Figure A-1. ISA Sample




                                     A-5
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS



                                    FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY


                          INTERCONNECTION SECURITY AGREEMENT




       SECTION 1: INTERCONNECTION STATEMENT OF REQUIREMENTS

       The requirements for interconnection between “Organization A” and “Organization B”
       are for the express purpose of exchanging data between “System A,” owned by
       Organization A, and "System B,” owned by Organization B. Organization B requires
       the use of Organization A's "XYZ database" and Organization A requires the use of
       Organization B's "ABC database," as approved and directed by the Secretary of
       "Agency" in "Proclamation A," dated (date). The expected benefit is to expedite the
       processing of data associated with "Project R" within prescribed timelines.

       SECTION 2: SYSTEM SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS

           General Information/Data Description. The interconnection between System
           A, owned by Organization A, and System B, owned by Organization B, is a two-
           way path. The purpose of the interconnection is to deliver the XYZ database to
           Organization B's Data Analysis Department and to deliver the ABC database to
           Organization A's Research Office.

           Services Offered. No user services are offered. This connection only
           exchanges data between Organization A's system and Organization B's system
           via a dedicated in-house connection.

           Data Sensitivity. The sensitivity of data exchanged between Organization A
           and Organization B is Sensitive-But-Unclassified.

           User Community. All Organization A users with access to the data received
           from Organization B are U.S. citizens with a valid and current Organization A
           background investigation. All Organization B users with access to the data
           received from Organization A are U.S. citizens with a valid and current
           Organization B background investigation.

           Information Exchange Security. The security of the information being passed
           on this two-way connection is protected through the use of FIPS 140-2 approved
           encryption mechanisms. The connections at each end are located within
           controlled access facilities, guarded 24 hours a day. Individual users will not
           have access to the data except through their systems security software inherent
           to the operating system. All access is controlled by authentication methods to
           validate the approved users.


                                    FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                              1


                                      Figure A-1. Continued




                                                A-6
                       SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS




                                FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

     Trusted Behavior Expectations. Organization A's system and users are
     expected to protect Organization B’s ABC database, and Organization B's
     system and users are expected to protect Organization A’s XYZ database, in
     accordance with the Privacy Act and Trade Secrets Act (18 U.S. Code 1905)
     and the Unauthorized Access Act (18 U.S. Code 2701 and 2710).

     Formal Security Policy. Policy documents that govern the protection of the
     data are Organization A's "XXX Policy" and Organization B's "YYY Policy."

     Incident Reporting. The party discovering a security incident will report it in
     accordance with its incident reporting procedures. In the case of Organization
     B, any security incident will be reported to the Computer Security Incident
     Response Capability located at the Data Security Complex. Policy governing
     the reporting of Security Incidents is CC-2234.

     Audit Trail Responsibilities. Both parties are responsible for auditing
     application processes and user activities involving the interconnection.
     Activities that will be recorded include event type, date and time of event, user
     identification, workstation identification, success or failure of access attempts,
     and security actions taken by system administrators or security officers. Audit
     logs will be retained for one (1) year.

SECTION 3: TOPOLOGICAL DRAWING


                                  (Insert a drawing here.)



SECTION 4: SIGNATORY AUTHORITY

This ISA is valid for one (1) year after the last date on either signature below. At that
time it will be updated, reviewed, and reauthorized. Either party may terminate this
agreement upon 30 days’ advanced notice in writing or in the event of a security
incident that necessitates an immediate response.

(Organization A Official)                         (Organization B Official)




_______________________________                   _____________________________
(Signature               Date)                    (Signature             Date)

                             FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                                           2


                                  Figure A-1. Continued




                                            A-7
                                 SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


Appendix B—Memorandum of Understanding/Agreement

The organizations that own and operate the connected systems should establish a Memorandum of
Understanding (or Agreement) (MOU/A) (or an equivalent document) that defines the responsibilities of
both parties in establishing, operating, and securing the interconnection. This management document
should not contain technical details of the interconnection. Those details should be addressed separately
in the Interconnection Security Agreement (ISA) (see Appendix A).

An MOU/A development guide is provided below, although organizations may use their own MOU/A
format, if appropriate. Figure B-1 depicts a sample MOU/A.

B.1       Supersession

Identify any previous agreements that this memorandum supersedes, including document titles and dates.
If the memorandum does not supersede any other agreements, so state.

B.2       Introduction

Use this section to describe the purpose of the memorandum. Sample language is provided in the sample
memorandum. Identify the organizations and IT systems that are involved in the interconnection.

B.3       Authorities

Identify any relevant legislative, regulatory, or policy authorities on which the MOU/A is based.

B.4       Background

Use this section to describe the IT systems that will be connected; the data that will be shared, exchanged,
or passed one-way across the interconnection; and the business purpose for the interconnection.

The description of the systems should be brief and nontechnical. The goal is to identify the systems and
their boundaries. The memorandum should not provide system specifications. This section should
include the formal name of each system; briefly describe their functions; identify their physical locations;
identify their sensitivity or classification level; and identify the type(s) of data they store, process, and/or
transmit.

B.5       Communications

Discuss the communications that will be exchanged between the parties throughout the duration of the
interconnection. Identify the specific events for which the parties must exchange formal notification, and
discuss the nature of such communications.

B.6       Interconnecting Security Agreement

State that the parties will jointly develop and sign an ISA before the systems can be connected. In
addition, describe the purpose of the ISA.




                                                      B-1
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


B.7       Security

State that both parties agree to abide by the security arrangements specified in the ISA. In addition, state
that both parties certify that their respective system is designed, managed, and operated in compliance
with all relevant federal laws, regulations, and policies.

B.8       Cost Considerations

This section provides the financial details of the agreement. It specifies who will pay for each part of the
interconnection and the conditions under which financial commitments may be made. Typically, each
organization is responsible for the equipment necessary to interconnect its local system, whereas the
organizations jointly fund the interconnecting mechanism or media. However, the financial arrangements
are fully negotiable.

B.9       Timeline

Identify the expiration date of the memorandum and procedures for reauthorizing it. In addition, stipulate
that the memorandum may be terminated with written notice from one of the parties to the other. The
memorandum and the ISA should have the same expiration date.

B.10      Signatory Authority

The memorandum must include a signature line, containing two signature blocks for each designated
approval authority. Place the two signature blocks on the same line: one signature on the left and one on
the right. Include an area for the “date” signed.




                                                    B-2
                    SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS




                         FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

  MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING (OR AGREEMENT)



                   Between “Organization A”
                             and
                       “Organization B”




                   (ORGANIZATIONAL SEAL[S] HERE)




                              (DATE HERE)

(Organization A)                                        (Organization B)




                         FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY




                          Figure B-1. MOU/A Sample




                                     B-3
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS




                                   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING (OR AGREEMENT)



       SUPERSEDES: (None or document title and date)

       INTRODUCTION

       The purpose of this memorandum is to establish a management agreement between
       “Organization A” and “Organization B” regarding the development, management,
       operation, and security of a connection between "System A," owned by Organization
       A, and "System B,” owned by Organization B. This agreement will govern the
       relationship between Organization A and Organization B, including designated
       managerial and technical staff, in the absence of a common management authority.

       AUTHORITY

       The authority for this agreement is based on "Proclamation A" issued by the
       Secretary of the "Agency" on (date).

       BACKGROUND

       It is the intent of both parties to this agreement to interconnect the following
       information technology (IT) systems to exchange data between "ABC database" and
       "XYZ database." Organization A requires the use of Organization B's ABC database,
       and Organization B requires the use of Organization A's XYZ database, as approved
       and directed by the Secretary of Agency in Proclamation A. The expected benefit of
       the interconnection is to expedite the processing of data associated with "Project R"
       within prescribed timelines.

       Each IT system is described below:

            SYSTEM A
             – Name
             – Function
             – Location
             – Description of data, including sensitivity or classification level

            SYSTEM B
             – Name
             – Function
             – Location
             – Description of data, including sensitivity or classification level


                                       FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                                                     1


                                         Figure B-1. Continued




                                                   B-4
                       SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS



                             FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

COMMUNICATIONS

Frequent formal communications are essential to ensure the successful management
and operation of the interconnection. The parties agree to maintain open lines of
communication between designated staff at both the managerial and technical levels.
All communications described herein must be conducted in writing unless otherwise
noted.

The owners of System A and System B agree to designate and provide contact
information for technical leads for their respective system, and to facilitate direct
contacts between technical leads to support the management and operation of the
interconnection. To safeguard the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the
connected systems and the data they store, process, and transmit, the parties agree
to provide notice of specific events within the time frames indicated below:

    Security Incidents: Technical staff will immediately notify their designated
    counterparts by telephone or e-mail when a security incident(s) is detected, so
    the other party may take steps to determine whether its system has been
    compromised and to take appropriate security precautions. The system owner
    will receive formal notification in writing within five (5) business days after
    detection of the incident(s).

    Disasters and Other Contingencies: Technical staff will immediately notify their
    designated counterparts by telephone or e-mail in the event of a disaster or other
    contingency that disrupts the normal operation of one or both of the connected
    systems.

    Material Changes to System Configuration: Planned technical changes to the
    system architecture will be reported to technical staff before such changes are
    implemented. The initiating party agrees to conduct a risk assessment based on
    the new system architecture and to modify and re-sign the ISA within one (1)
    month of implementation.

    New Interconnections: The initiating party will notify the other party at least one
    (1) month before it connects its IT system with any other IT system, including
    systems that are owned and operated by third parties.

    Personnel Changes: The parties agree to provide notification of the separation
    or long-term absence of their respective system owner or technical lead. In
    addition, both parties will provide notification of any changes in point of contact
    information. Both parties also will provide notification of changes to user profiles,
    including users who resign or change job responsibilities.


                               FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

                                             2


                                  Figure B-1. Continued




                                            B-5
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS




                                   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

       INTERCONNECTION SECURITY AGREEMENT

       The technical details of the interconnection will be documented in an Interconnection
       Security Agreement (ISA). The parties agree to work together to develop the ISA,
       which must be signed by both parties before the interconnection is activated.
       Proposed changes to either system or the interconnecting medium will be reviewed
       and evaluated to determine the potential impact on the interconnection. The ISA will
       be renegotiated before changes are implemented. Signatories to the ISA shall be the
       DAA for each system.

       SECURITY

       Both parties agree to work together to ensure the joint security of the connected
       systems and the data they store, process, and transmit, as specified in the ISA.
       Each party certifies that its respective system is designed, managed, and operated in
       compliance with all relevant federal laws, regulations, and policies.

       COST CONSIDERATIONS

       Both parties agree to equally share the costs of the interconnecting mechanism
       and/or media, but no such expenditures or financial commitments shall be made
       without the written concurrence of both parties. Modifications to either system that
       are necessary to support the interconnection are the responsibility of the respective
       system owners’ organization.

       TIMELINE

       This agreement will remain in effect for one (1) year after the last date on either
       signature in the signature block below. After one (1) year, this agreement will expire
       without further action. If the parties wish to extend this agreement, they may do so
       by reviewing, updating, and reauthorizing this agreement. The newly signed
       agreement should explicitly supersede this agreement, which should be referenced
       by title and date. If one or both of the parties wish to terminate this agreement
       prematurely, they may do so upon 30 days' advanced notice or in the event of a
       security incident that necessitates an immediate response.

       SIGNATORY AUTHORITY

       I agree to the terms of this Memorandum of Understanding (or Agreement).

       (Organization A Official)                        (Organization B Official)

       _______________________________                  _____________________________
       (Signature               Date)                   (Signature             Date)

                                   FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
                                               3


                                       Figure B-1 – Continued.




                                                  B-6
                                SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


Appendix C—System Interconnection Implementation Plan

Appendix C provides guidance for developing a System Interconnection Implementation Plan and is
based on the discussion in Section 4. In addition, refer to NIST Special Publication 800-27, Engineering
Principles for Information Technology Security (A Baseline for Achieving Security), for guidance on
security principles that should be incorporated into planning activities.

C.1       Introduction

Describe the purpose and scope of the implementation plan, and identify policy requirements or guidance
on which the system interconnection is based. Identify the information technology (IT) systems that will
be interconnected, the organizations that own them, and the purpose for which they are used. Discuss the
purpose for interconnecting the systems, and describe the services that will be offered over the
interconnection. Briefly describe each section of the document.

C.2       System Interconnection Description

Describe the architecture of the interconnection, including security controls, hardware, software, servers,
and applications. Provide a diagram of the interconnection, showing all relevant components.

C.2.1     Security Controls

Identify and describe the security controls that are currently in place for the IT systems that will be
interconnected. Identify the threats that could compromise the system interconnection and describe how
existing security controls will be configured to mitigate those threats. Identify any new security controls
that will be implemented, including network- and application-level controls.

C.2.2     System Hardware

Hardware is the physical equipment associated with an IT system. Identify and describe the hardware
that is currently used on the systems that will be interconnected, and describe how it will support the
interconnection. Identify and describe any new hardware that will be installed as part of the
interconnection, including its function.

C.2.3     System Software

Software includes the application programs, software routines, and operating system software associated
with an IT system. Identify and describe software currently used on the systems that will be
interconnected, and describe how it will be used to support the interconnection. Identify any new
software that will be installed as part of the interconnection, including its function.

C.2.4     Data/Information Exchange

Organizations connect IT systems to share data, make data available, or pass data one-way from one
organization to the other. It may be necessary to install a database that is dedicated to the interconnection.
Identify the type(s) of data that will be exchanged between the organizations, and describe the
transmission methods that will be used. Identify how the data will be stored and processed. Provide a
data flow diagram.




                                                     C-1
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


C.2.5        Services and Applications

Describe the services and applications that the participating organizations will provide over the
interconnection, as well as any new services or applications that will be developed, both initially and in
the future. Examples include e-mail, database query, file query, and general computational services,
application servers, and authentication servers.

C.3          Roles and Responsibilities

Identify the personnel who will establish and maintain the system interconnection, and define their
respective roles and responsibilities. A variety of staff skills may be required, including a program
manager, network architect, security specialist, system administrator, network administrator, database
administrator, application developer, and graphics designer. Staff from both organizations should be
involved, if appropriate. Also, identify the responsibilities of staff who will be authorized to use the
interconnection after it is established (i.e., the users). The interconnection rules of behavior should be
consulted when developing this section.

C.4          Tasks and Procedures

Provide a step-by-step approach to establishing the interconnection, based on a series of tasks and
procedures. A list of suggested tasks is provided below. Organizations should view them in the context
of their own requirements. In addition, provide a checklist for each task to ensure it is performed
properly.

C.4.1        Implement Security Controls

The process of interconnecting IT systems could open an organization to a range of security
vulnerabilities. Consequently, the first step that organizations should take is to implement appropriate
security controls. Provide procedures for configuring current controls and, if necessary, implementing
new controls. Security controls may include firewalls, identification and authentication mechanisms,
logical access controls, encryption devices, intrusion detection systems (IDS), and physical security
measures.

C.4.2        Install Hardware and Software

Provide procedures for configuring or installing hardware and software to establish the interconnection, if
required.

C.4.3        Integrate Applications

Provide procedures for linking applications across the interconnection, if required. Also, provide
procedures for developing and implementing new applications, if required.

C.4.4        Conduct a Risk Assessment9

Describe the process for conducting an assessment to identify risks associated with the newly established
interconnection, or refer to an organization’s existing risk assessment methodology. Discuss how risks
will be addressed. For example, risks may be mitigated by adjusting security controls or by implementing
additional countermeasures.


9
      Alternately, each organization may decide to recertify and reaccredit its respective system, as discussed in Section 4.2.7.


                                                                C-2
                               SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


C.4.5     Conduct Operational and Security Testing

Provide detailed test procedures to verify whether the interconnection operates efficiently and securely.
Also, describe how the results of the testing will be measured, and how deficiencies will be addressed.

C.4.6     Conduct Security Training and Awareness

Describe a training and awareness program for all personnel who will be authorized to manage, use,
and/or operate the system interconnection, including any new computer applications associated with it.
Training should ensure that authorized personnel know the rules of behavior associated with the
interconnection and how to request assistance if they encounter problems. In addition, personnel who are
responsible for maintaining the interconnection should receive specialized training to ensure they are
proficient in their responsibilities.

C.5       Schedule And Budget

Provide a schedule for establishing the interconnection, including the estimated time required to complete
each task. Also, define a budget for the project, and describe how costs will be apportioned between the
participating organizations, if required.

C.6       Documentation

Cite or include all documentation that is relevant for establishing the interconnection, including system
security plans, design specifications, and standard operating procedures.




                                                    C-3
                                SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


Appendix D—Glossary

Selected terms used in the Security Guide for Interconnecting Information Technology Systems are
defined below.

Access Control: The process of granting access to information technology (IT) system resources only to
authorized users, programs, processes, or other systems.

Audit Trail: A record showing who has accessed an IT system and what operations the user has
performed during a given period.

Authentication: The process of verifying the authorization of a user, process, or device, usually as a
prerequisite for granting access to resources in an IT system.

Certification and Accreditation (C&A): Certification involves the testing and evaluation of the
technical and nontechnical security features of an IT system to determine its compliance with a set of
specified security requirements. Accreditation is a process whereby a Designated Approval Authority
(DAA) or other authorizing management official authorizes an IT system to operate for a specific purpose
using a defined set of safeguards at an acceptable level of risk.

Data Element: A basic unit of information that has a unique meaning and subcategories (data items) of
distinct value. Examples of data elements include gender, race, and geographic location.

Dedicated Line: A leased or privately owned transmission line that provides a constant transmission
path from point A to point B.

Disconnection: The termination of an interconnection between two or more IT systems. A
disconnection may be planned (e.g., due to changed business needs) or unplanned (i.e., due to an attack or
other contingency).

Encryption: The translation of data into a form that is unintelligible without a deciphering mechanism.

File Transfer Protocol (FTP): A service that supports file transfer between local and remote computers.

Firewall: A system designed to prevent unauthorized access to or from a private network. Firewalls can
be implemented in both hardware and software, or a combination of both.

Hub: A common connection point for devices in a network. Hubs commonly are used to pass data from
one device (or segment) to another.

Identification: The process of verifying the identity of a user, process, or device, usually as a
prerequisite for granting access to resources in an IT system.

Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN): A public-switched network providing digital connections
for the concurrent transmission of voice, video, data, and images.

Interconnection Security Agreement (ISA): In this guide, an agreement established between the
organizations that own and operate connected IT systems to document the technical requirements of the
interconnection. The ISA also supports a Memorandum of Understanding or Agreement (MOU/A)
between the organizations.



                                                    D-1
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


Intrusion Detection System (IDS): A software application that can be implemented on host operating
systems or as network devices to monitor activity that is associated with intrusions or insider misuse, or
both.

Java: A programming language developed by Sun Microsystems. Java contains a number of features
that make it well suited for use on the World Wide Web.

JavaScript: A scripting language for use in developing interactive Web sites.

Kerberos: An authentication system developed at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).
Kerberos is designed to enable two parties to exchange private information across a public network.

Memorandum of Understanding/Agreement (MOU/A): A document established between two or more
parties to define their respective responsibilities in accomplishing a particular goal or mission. In this
guide, an MOU/A defines the responsibilities of two or more organizations in establishing, operating, and
securing a system interconnection.

RADIUS (Remote Authentication Dial-In User Service): An authentication and accounting system
used to control access to an Internet Service Provider (ISP) system.

Risk: The net mission impact considering the probability that a particular threat will exercise
(accidentally trigger or intentionally exploit) a particular information system vulnerability and the
resulting impact if this should occur.

Router: On a network, a device that determines the best path for forwarding a data packet toward its
destination. The router is connected to at least two networks, and is located at the gateway where one
network meets another.

Security Controls: Protective measures used to meet the security requirements specified for IT
resources.

Server: A computer or device on a network that manages network resources. Examples include file
servers (to store files), print servers (to manage one or more printers), network servers (to manage
network traffic), and database servers (to process database queries).

Switch: A network device that filters and forwards packets between LAN segments.

System Interconnection: The direct connection of two or more IT systems for the purpose of sharing
data and other information resources.

T1 Line: A telecommunications line with bandwidth capacity of 1.54 Mbps.

T3 Line: A telecommunications line with bandwidth capacity of 45 Mbps.

Threat: The potential for a threat-source to exercise (accidentally trigger or intentionally exploit) a
specific vulnerability.

Trojan Horse: A computer program containing an apparent or actual useful function that also contains
additional functions that permit the unauthorized collection, falsification, or destruction of data.




                                                    D-2
                                SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


Virtual Private Network (VPN): A data network that enables two or more parties to communicate
securely across a public network by creating a private connection, or “tunnel,” between them.

Virus: A computer program containing a malicious segment that attaches itself to an application program
or other executable component.

Vulnerability: A flaw or weakness in system security procedures, design, implementation, or internal
controls that could be exercised (accidentally triggered or intentionally exploited) and result in a security
breach or a violation of the system’s security policy.

Worm: A computer program or algorithm that replicates itself over a computer network and usually
performs malicious actions.




                                                     D-3
                              SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


Appendix E—References


Christopher King. “Extranet Access Control Issues,” in Harold F. Tipton and Micki Krause, ed.,
Information Security Management Handbook. Vol. 2, 4th ed., New York: Auerbach, 2000, pp. 99-114.

Defense Authorization Act (Fiscal Year 2001). Public Law 106-398, Title X, Subtitle G. Government
Information Security Reform. October 30, 2000.

Department of Health and Human Services. Automated Information Systems Security Program
Handbook. http://irm.cit.nih.gov/policy/aissp.html

“Federal Reserve: Sound Practices Guidance on Information Security.” Computer Security Journal, Vol.
XIV, No.1, 1998, pp. 45-68.

Herold, Rebecca and Slemo Warigon. “Extranet Audit and Security.” Computer Security Journal, Vol.
XIV, No. 1, 1998, pp. 35-44.

GartnerGroup. “Extranet Security: Five Ways to Manage High-Stakes Risk.” Research Note, July 21,
1997.

GartnerGroup. “Securing the Extranet: A Statement of Understanding.” Research Note, January 20,
1998.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) 186-2,
Digital Signature Standard (DSS). January 2000.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-3, Establishing a Computer
Security Incidence Response Capability (CSIRC). November 1991.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-9, Good Security Practices for
Electronic Commerce, Including Electronic Data Interchange. December 1993.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-12, An Introduction to
Computer Security: The NIST Handbook. October 1995.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-14, Generally Accepted
Principles and Practices for Securing Information Technology Systems. September 1996.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-18, Guide for Developing
Security Plans for Information Technology Systems. December 1998.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-26, Security Self-Assessment
Guide for Information Technology Systems. November 2001.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-27, Engineering Principles for
Information Technology Security (A Baseline for Achieving Security). June 2001.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-28, Guidelines on Active
Content and Mobile Code. October 2001.



                                                  E-1
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-30, Risk Management Guide for
Information Technology Systems. January 2002.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems
(IDS). November 2001.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-33, Underlying Technical
Models for Information Technology Security. December 2001.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-34, Contingency Planning
Guide for Information Technology Systems. June 2002.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-41, Guidelines on Firewalls and
Firewall Policy. January 2002.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-42, Guidelines on Network
Security Testing. Forthcoming.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-46, Security Guide for
Telecommuting and Broadband Communications. August 2002.

National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-50, Building an Information
Technology Security Awareness and Training Program. Forthcoming.

Norman E. Smith. “The Next Great Networking Frontier.” September 27, 1999.
http://webdeveloper.earthweb.com/webecom/article/0,,11985_616141,00.html

Office of Management and Budget (OMB). Circular A-130, Management of Federal Information
Resources, Security of Federal Automated Information Resources, Appendix III. November 2000.

Online Source. “Establishing an Extranet: Overview.” www.office.com/global

Public Law 100-235. Computer Security Act of 1987. January 8, 1988.

Solutionary. “How to Protect Information: A Comprehensive Guide to Securing Networks and Systems.”
2001. www.solutionary.com

U.S. Customs Service. “Interconnection Security Agreements.” August 25, 2000.
www.bsp.gsa.gov/list.cfm




                                                  E-2
                                SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


Appendix F—Index

Access                                                   Firewalls, 3-3, 4-2, 4-3, 5-2, 5-3, A-4, C-2, D-1
  control list (ACL), 4-3
  privileges, 4-3, 5-2                                   Hardware, 3-3, 3-4, 3-5, 4-3, 4-4, C-1, C-2, D-1
  rules, 2-2, 4-3, 4-5                                   Hubs, 3-3, 4-4, A-4, D-1
Access badges, 4-3
Applications, 2-2, 3-2, 3-3, 3-5, 4-3, 4-4, C-1,         Identification and authentication, 4-2, C-2
  C-2, C-3                                               Interconnection Security Agreement (ISA),
Audit                                                       ES-1, 3-2, 3-5, 3-6, 4-1, 4-2, 5-1, 5-3, 6-2, A-
  logs, 3-4, 4-2, 4-6, 5-2, 6-2, A-3                        1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-5, B-1, B-2, B-5, B-6,
  trail, A-3, A-7, D-1                                      D-2
                                                         Interoperability, 3-3
Biometrics, 4-2, 4-3                                     Intrusion detection system (IDS), 4-2, D-1, E-2
Budget, 3-5, C-3
Business case, 3-1                                       Joint planning team, 3-1, 3-2, 3-5, 3-6, 4-1

Capital planning, 3-1                                    Legal Counsel, 3-2, 4-3, 6-1
Certification and accreditation (C&A), 3-2, 4-5,
  D-1                                                    Logical access controls, 4-3, C-2
Change control board (CCB), 5-3
Change management, 3-4, 5-1, 5-3, B-5                    Memorandum of Understanding/Agreement
Cipher locks, 4-3                                         (MOU/A), ES-1, 3-2, 3-5, 3-6, 4-5, 6-2, A-1,
Communication, 3-1, 5-1, 5-2, B-1, B-5                    A-3, B-1, B-3, D-2
Computer workstations, 3-3, 4-3, 4-4, A-4
Contingency                                              Office of Management and Budget (OMB)
  plan, 3-2, 3-4                                           Circular A-130, Appendix III, ES-1, 2-2, A-1,
  planning, 3-4, 5-3                                       E-2
Costs, 2-1, 3-1, 3-2, 3-5, 3-6, B-2, B-6, C-3
                                                         Passwords, 4-2, 4-3
Data                                                     Privacy
  backup, 2-1, 3-4                                         Act, 4-5, A-3, A-7
  classified, 1-1, 4-1, B-1, B-4                           issues, 3-2
  destruction, 3-4, 6-1                                    Officer, 3-2
  element naming, 3-4
  ownership, 3-4                                         Recertification and reaccreditation, 4-4, 4-5
  retrieval, 5-3                                         Risk assessment, 2-2, 3-2, 6-2, B-5, C-2
  sensitivity, 3-3, 4-1, 4-2, A-3, A-6, B-1, B-4         Roles and responsibilities, 3-5, 4-1, C-2
  sharing, 3-2                                           Routers, 3-2, 3-3, 4-3, 4-4, 5-3, A-4, D-2
  storage, 3-4                                           Rules of behavior, 3-4, 3-5, 4-5, A-3, A-7, C-2,
  usage, 3-4                                               C-3
Dedicated line, 2-1, 3-2, 4-4, D-1
Designated Approving Authority (DAA), 3-2,               Schedule, 3-5, 6-1, C-3
  3-6, A-1, A-2, A-4, B-6, D-1                           Security
Digital                                                    controls, ES-1, 2-2, 3-3, 3-5, 3-6, 4-1, 4-2,
  certificates, 4-2                                           4-4, 5-1, 5-2, 6-2, A-2, C-1, C-2, D-2
  signatures, 4-2, 4-3                                     incidents, 3-4, 5-1, 5-3, 6-2, A-3, A-7, B-5
                                                           patches, 4-4
Encryption, 2-1, 4-2, 4-3, A-4, C-2, D-1                   physical and environmental, 4-3
Equipment, 5-2, A-4                                        reviews, 3-2, 5-2



                                                   F-1
SECURITY GUIDE FOR INTERCONNECTING INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY SYSTEMS


Segregation of duties, 3-3, 5-2                               maintaining, ES-1, 1-1, 3-5, 5-1, C-3
Servers, 3-2, 3-3, 4-2, 4-3, 4-4, A-4, C-1, C-2,              planning, ES-1, 1-1, 3-1, 3-5
  D-2                                                         restoring, 5-1, 6-2
Services, 3-3, 3-4, 4-4, 5-3, A-3, A-6, C-1, C-2              risks, 2-2, 3-1
Smart cards, 4-2                                            System security plan, 2-2, 4-1, 4-5, 5-4, 6-1, C-3
Software, 3-2, 3-3, 3-4, 3-5, 4-3, 4-4, 5-3, A-6,
  C-1, C-2, D-1                                             Testing, 3-4, 4-1, 4-4, 5-2, 5-3, C-3, E-2
Switches, 3-2, 3-3, 4-3, 4-4, A-4, D-2                      Training and awareness, 3-4, 4-1, 4-3, 4-5, 5-3,
System interconnection                                        A-4, C-3
  activate, 4-6
  benefits, 2-1, 3-2, A-2                                   User community, 3-3, A-3, A-6
  components, 2-1, 3-2, 3-3, 3-4, A-4, C-1                  User profiles, 3-3, 5-2, B-5
  defined, 2-1, D-2
  disconnecting, ES-1, 1-1, 3-5, 5-1, 6-1, D-1              Virtual private network (VPN), 2-1, 3-2, 4-4,
  establishing, ES-1, 1-1, 3-2, 3-5, 4-1, 4-2, 5-1,           D-3
     A-1, B-1, C-2, C-3, D-2                                Virus scanning, 4-3
  implementation plan, ES-1, 3-2, 4-1, 4-2, C-1
  interim approval, 3-6                                     Warning banner, 4-3
  levels, 2-2, 3-2




                                                      F-2
