                                                          Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                          System as a National Security System




NIST Special Publication 800-59
                                  Guideline for Identifying an
                                  Information System as a
                                  National Security System
                                  William C. Barker




   INFORMATION                               S E C U R I T Y

                                   Computer Security Division
                                   Information Technology Laboratory
                                   National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                   Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930




                                   August 2003




                                   U.S. Department of Commerce
                                   Donald L. Evans, Secretary

                                   Technology Administration
                                   Phillip J. Bond, Under Secretary of Commerce for Technology

                                   National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                   Arden L. Bement, Jr., Director
                                                                                   Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                                                   System as a National Security System




                              Reports on Computer Systems Technology
           The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards (NIST) promotes the
U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical leadership for the Nation’s measurement and standards
infrastructure for information technology. ITL develops tests, test methods, reference data, proof of concept
implementations and technical analyses to advance the development and productive use of information technology.
ITL’s responsibilities include the development of technical, physical, administrative, and management standards and
guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive unclassified information in federal computer systems.
This Special Publication 800 series reports on ITL’s research, guidance, and outreach efforts in computer security, and
its collaborative activities with industry, government, and academic organizations.




      National Institute of Standards and Technology, Special Publication 800-59
        Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 800-59, 21 pages (August 2003)




SP 800-59                                                                                                         PAGE ii
                                                                                              Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                                                              System as a National Security System


                                                  GUIDELINE FOR
         IDENTIFICATION OF INFORMATION SYSTEMS AS
                NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEMS




                                                   Table of Contents


Table of Contents.....................................................................................iii
1.0 Introduction ........................................................................................ 1
2.0 Basis for Identification of National Security Systems............................ 3
3.0 Method for Identifying National Security Systems............................... 5
  3.1 Determination of Responsibilities............................................................................. 5
  3.2 National Security System Identification Checklist ................................................... 6
  3.3 Dispute Resolution.................................................................................................... 6
Appendix A: National Security System Identification Checklist.................. 7
  A.1 Minimum Question Set ........................................................................................... 7
    A.1.1 Intelligence Activities ....................................................................................... 7
    A.1.2 Cryptologic Activities ....................................................................................... 8
    A.1.3 Command and Control of Military Forces ........................................................ 8
    A.1.4 Weapons and Weapons Systems ....................................................................... 8
    A.1.5 Systems Critical to the Direct Fulfillment of Military or Intelligence Missions
    ..................................................................................................................................... 8
    A.1.6 Classified Systems ............................................................................................ 9
  A.2 Optional Checklist Material..................................................................................... 9
  A.3 Checklist................................................................................................................ 10
Appendix B: References.......................................................................... 11
Appendix C: Glossary of Terms .............................................................. 13




SP 800-59                                                                                                                        PAGE iii
                                              Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                              System as a National Security System




            This page intentionally left blank.




SP 800-59                                                                    PAGE iv
                                                               Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                               System as a National Security System




1.0 Introduction
This document provides guidelines developed in conjunction with the Department of
Defense, including the National Security Agency, for identifying an information system
as a national security system. The basis for these guidelines is the Federal Information
Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA, Title III, Public Law 107-347, December 17,
2002), which provides government-wide requirements for information security,
superseding the Government Information Security Reform Act and the Computer
Security Act.

FISMA both provides a framework for ensuring the effectiveness of information security
controls over information resources that support Federal operations and assets and
provides for the maintenance of minimum controls required to protect Federal
information and information systems. Federal agencies are responsible for providing
information security protection of information collected or maintained by or on behalf of
the agency and information systems used or operated by or on behalf of the agency. The
head of each Federal agency is also responsible for (1) assessing the risk and magnitude
of the harm that could result from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disruption,
modification, or destruction of information or information systems that support
operations or assets under their control; (2) determining the levels of information
security appropriate to protect such information and information systems; (3)
implementing policies and procedures to cost-effectively reduce risks to an acceptable
level; and (4) periodically testing and evaluating information security controls and
techniques to ensure that they are effectively implemented.

Except for national security systems as defined by FISMA, the Secretary of Commerce is
responsible for prescribing standards and guidelines pertaining to Federal information
systems on the basis of standards and guidelines developed by NIST. The Committee on
National Security Systems (CNSS) along with Federal agencies that operate systems
falling within the definition of national security systems provide security standards and
guidance for national security systems. In addition to defining the term national security
system FISMA amended the NIST Act, at 15 U.SC. 278g-3(b)(3), to require NIST to
provide guidelines for identifying an information system as a national security system. As
stated in the House Committee report, “This guidance is not to govern such systems, but
rather to ensure that agencies receive consistent guidance on the identification of systems
that should be governed by national security system requirements.” Report of the
Committee on Government Reform, U. S House of Representatives, Report 107-787,
November 14, 2002, p. 85.

The Department of Defense and the Director, Central Intelligence have authority to
develop policies, guidelines, and standards for national security systems. The Director,
Central Intelligence is responsible for policies relating to systems processing intelligence
information. The Committee for National Security Systems, whose executive agent is the
National Security Agency, was established to develop operating policies, procedures,
guidelines, instructions and standards as necessary to implement provisions of the
National Policy for the Security of National Security Telecommunications and


SP 800-59                                                                                     PAGE 1
                                                              Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                              System as a National Security System


Information Systems (see NSTISSD Number 502). The Director of the Office of
Management and Budget (OMB) retains responsibility for oversight of national security
system information security policies and practices with respect to:

   •   Overseeing agency compliance with the requirements of Subchapter III of
       Chapter 35 of Title 44, United States Code, including through any authorized
       action under Title 40, United States Code, section 11303, to enforce
       accountability for compliance with such requirements; and

   •   Reporting to Congress no later than March 1 of each year on agency compliance
       with the requirements of Subchapter III of Chapter 35 of Title 44 United States
       Code, including –

            o A summary of the findings of evaluations required by 44 U.S.C. 3545;
            o An assessment of the development, promulgation, and adoption of, and
              compliance with, standards developed under 15 USC 278g-3 and
              promulgated under 40 U.S.C. 11331;
            o Significant deficiencies in agency information security practices;
            o Planned remedial action to address such deficiencies; and
            o A summary of, and OMB views on, the report prepared by NIST under 15
              USC 278g-3.

Accordingly, the purpose of these guidelines is not to establish requirements for national
security systems, but rather to assist agencies in determining which, if any, of their
systems are national security systems as defined by FISMA and are to be governed by
applicable requirements for such systems, issued in accordance with law and as directed
by the President.




SP 800-59                                                                                    PAGE 2
                                                                        Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                                        System as a National Security System




2.0 Basis for Identification of National Security Systems
 The basis for the identification of 'national security systems' is the definition provided in
 law (44 U.S.C. 3542(b)(2), which was established by FISMA, Title III, Public Law 107­
 347, December 17, 2002):

“(2)(A) The term `national security system' means any information system (including
       any telecommunications system) used or operated by an agency or by a contractor
       of an agency, or other organization on behalf of an agency—

        (i) the function, operation, or use of which—

                 (I) involves intelligence activities;

                 (II) involves cryptologic activities related to national security;

                 (III) involves command and control of military forces;

                 (IV) involves equipment that is an integral part of a weapon or weapons
                 system; or

                 (V) subject to subparagraph (B), is critical to the direct fulfillment of
                 military or intelligence missions; or

        (ii) is protected at all times by procedures established for information that have
        been specifically authorized under criteria established by an Executive order or an
        Act of Congress to be kept classified 1 in the interest of national defense or foreign
        policy.

     (B) Subparagraph (A)(i)(V) does not include a system that is to be used for routine
     administrative and business applications (including payroll, finance, logistics, and
     personnel management applications).”

Systems not meeting any of these criteria are not national security systems. (Further
delineation of the legal definition of the term national security system is found in
Appendix A to this guideline.)

As described in the House Committee report, FISMA’s national security system
definition “encompasses the longstanding statutory treatment of military and intelligence


1*
   See Glossary definition for classified information. See also Executive Order 13292 under the authority
of which information may be classified.


SP 800-59                                                                                              PAGE 3
                                                            Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                            System as a National Security System


mission-related systems and classified systems.” House Report 107-787, p. 77. It
combines the “Warner Amendment” national security system definition, e.g., section
5142 of the Clinger-Cohen Act, at 40 U.S.C. 11103(a), and the treatment of classified
systems under section 3 of the Computer Security Act of 1987.




SP 800-59                                                                                  PAGE 4
                                                                         Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                                         System as a National Security System




3.0 Method for Identifying National Security Systems
3.1 Determination of Responsibilities

The head of each agency is responsible for designating an agency information security
official to determine which, if any, agency systems are national security systems.

Each agency is responsible for identification of all national security systems under its
ownership or control. Answering each of the questions stated in the National Security
System Identification Checklist, provided as Appendix A to this guideline, is one method
for documenting the basis for determination. If the answer to any of the questions is
affirmative, the system is designated a national security system. Note that use of the
specific form provided in Appendix A is not mandatory. Agencies may develop and use
an alternate methodology. It is anticipated that some agencies will require answers to
additio nal questions. However, each of the questions listed on the sample checklist
should be answered and recorded.

Ideally, a national security system should be designated as early as possible in its life
cycle. The set of certification and accreditation standards, policies, procedures,
guidelines, and instructions that apply to each system depend on whether or not the
system is a national security system. For systems that are currently in operation, and for
which no national security determination has been made, such determination should be
accomplished as soon as possible.

Under the provisions of Title 44 United States Code § 3542(b)(2)(A)(i)(V), it is possible
that some systems not originally established as national security systems may become
national security systems as a result of being designated as critical to the direct
fulfillment of military or intelligence missions. 2 If the manager of a military or
intelligence mission determines that a system is critical to that mission, and the system
has not previously been identified as a national security system, the manager responsible
for that mission must so identify the system to the responsible entity designated by the
head of the agency that owns and/or operates the system (see Appendix A, Section
A.1.5).

When the manager of a military or intelligence mission determines that a system is no
longer critical to that mission, or when the mission is terminated, the manager responsible
for that mission must so notify the responsible entity designated by the head of the
agency that owns and/or operates the system, and the system ceases to be designated a
national security system. [Note that if a system is designated as a national security
system and then removed from that designation (and possibly be moved back at a later
time), it may prove very difficult to satisfy the changing security requirements on the
system. Therefore, such actions should not be taken casually.]

2
 Subparagraph (A)(i)(V) does not include a system that is to be used for routine administrative and
business applications (including payroll, finance, logistics, and personnel management applications.


SP 800-59                                                                                               PAGE 5
                                                                          Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                                          System as a National Security System




3.2 National Security System Identification Checklist

The National Security System Identification Checklist provided in Appendix A includes
six questions. An affirmative answer to one or more of the six questions should result in
the system being designated as a national security system. The six questions included in
the checklist is only the minimum set of questions on which a national security
designation may be based. 3 Individual departments and agencies may choose to include
additional questions so long as the decision regarding designation of a system as a
national security system is based exclusively on the definition provided in Section 2.0 of
this guideline.

3.3 Dispute Resolution
In some cases, a system owner may disagree with a determination by an organization
supported by the system regarding whether the system is critical to the direct fulfillment
of military or intelligence missions. If the agency that owns and/or operates a system
disputes identification of the system as a national security system, either the agency or
the mission manager may submit the issue to both the CNSS and the appropriate office at
the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). OMB will coordinate with other
cognizant offices of the Executive Office of the President as required.

If there is a dispute regarding security classification of information processed by a
system, the dispute must be submitted to the appropriate internal challenge program4 for
resolution. If the dispute cannot be resolved under the internal challenge program, or if a
dispute involves more than one agency, the issue may be sub mitted to the Information
Security Oversight Office (ISOO) for resolution. The ISOO may be contacted at
Information Security Oversight Office, National Archives and Records Administration,
700 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW, Room 500, Washington, DC 20408. 5 Any remaining
issues may be submitted to the National Security Council.




3
  Note that use of the specific form provided in Appendix A is not mandatory.
4
  Section 1.8(b) of E.O. 13292 [7] requires internal challenge programs for resolution of differences
regarding classification of information.
5
  Electronic mail address is isoo@nara.gov.


SP 800-59                                                                                                PAGE 6
                                                                           Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                                           System as a National Security System




Appendix A: National Security System Identification
Checklist
The National Security System Identification Checklist provided in this Appendix includes
six questions designed to determine whether the system meets the definition of a national
security system provided in Section 2. An affirmative answer to one or more of the six
questions should result in the system being designated as a national security system. The
checklist contained in this Appendix is only one alternative for documenting the basis for
national security system determination. Note that use of the specific form provided here­
in is not mandatory. A department or agency may develop and use an alternate checklist
or methodology.

A.1 Minimum Question Set
In order for a system to be designated a national security system, one of the following
questions must be answered in the affirmative:

       •   Does the function, operation, or use of the system involve intelligence activities?

       •   Does the function, operation, or use of the system involve cryptologic activities
           related to national security?

       •   Does the function, operation, or use of the system involve command and control
           of military forces?

       •   Does the function, operation, or use of the system involve equipment that is an
           integral part of a weapon or weapons system?

       •   Is the system critical to the direct fulfillment of military or intelligence missions?

       •   Does the system store, process, or communicate classified information?

These questio ns are included in the checklist found in Section A.3 of this guideline. The
following paragraphs provide some explanation and/or conditions applying to each
question.

A.1.1 Intelligence Activities
For purposes of this guideline, the term “intelligence activity” means all activities that
agencies within the Intelligence community are authorized to conduct pursuant to
Executive Order 12333, United States Intelligence Activities. As authorized by statute 6 ,
intelligence activities may also include counter drug or counter terrorism intelligence that
does not concern foreign countries if the intelligence information was collected or
developed by 1) an organization or organizations subordinate to the Director of Central

6
    E.g., Chapter 18 of Title 10, United States Code 124 and Chapter 35 of Title 44 United States Code.

SP 800-59                                                                                                 PAGE 7
                                                                     Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                                     System as a National Security System


Intelligence or 2) National Foreign Intelligence Programs subordinate to the Secretary of
Defense. Box 1 on the checklist should be marked yes if and only if the function,
operation, or use of the system involves intelligence activities as defined herein.

A.1.2 Cryptologic Activities
For purposes of completing the National Security System Identification Checklist,
“cryptologic activities” include signals intelligence activities, covered under intelligence
activities, and the solutions, products, and services to ensure the availability, integrity,
authentication, confidentiality, and non-repudiation of national security
telecommunications and information systems. Box 2 should be marked yes if and only if
the function, operation, or use of the system involves cryptologic activities as defined
herein.

A.1.3 Command and Control of Military Forces
For purposes of this guideline, command and control is the exercise of authority and
direction by a properly designated commander over assigned and attached forces in the
accomplishment of the mission. Command and control functions are performed through
an arrangement of personnel, equipment, communications, facilities, and procedures
employed by a commander in planning, directing, coordinating, and controlling forces
and operations in the accomplishment of the mission. Box 3 of the National Security
System Identification Checklist should be marked yes if and only if the function,
operation, or use of the system involve command and control of military forces.

A.1.4 Weapons and Weapons Systems
For purposes of this guideline, weapons are defined as being limited to weapons owned
by and/or under the control of military forces of the United States and any weapons of
mass destruction. 7 A weapons system is a combination of one or more weapons with all
related equipment, materials, services, personnel, and means of delivery and deployment
(if applicable) required for self-sufficiency. Box 4 of the National Security System
Identification Checklist should be marked yes if and only if the system involves
equipment that is an integral part of a weapon or weapons system as defined herein.

A.1.5 Systems Critical to the Direct Fulfillment of Military or
Intelligence Missions
Systems that are critical to the direct fulfillment of military or intelligence missions are
designated as national security systems unless they are to be used exclusively for routine
administrative and business applications. Examples of routine administrative and
business systems include those having payroll, finance, logistics, and personnel
management applications. Systems having high priority products associated with event-
based urgency, such as systems critical to direct mission fulfillment by deployed or
contingency military forces, are not routine. Box 5 of the National Security System
Identificatio n Checklist should be marked yes if and only if the system is critical to the


7
 The term weapon, as used herein, encompasses kinetic weapons, other nuclear/biological/chemical (NBC)
weapons and computer network attack (CNA) weapons.

SP 800-59                                                                                           PAGE 8
                                                                    Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                                    System as a National Security System


direct fulfillment of military or intelligence missions and is not used exclusively for
routine administrative and business applications.

A.1.6 Classified Systems
A system is a national security system if it processes, stores, or communicates classified
information. Executive orders and Acts of Congress have directed that some specific
systems are to be protected at all times by procedures that have been established for
information that is to be kept classified 8 in order to protect national defense or foreign
policy interests. Authority to assign security classifications to information is delegated in
Executive Order 12958 as amended by Executive Order 13292. Any system processing
information that is determined to be classified based upon one or more agency
classification guides is a classified system. Box 6 of the National Security System
Identification Checklist should be marked yes if and only if the system contains or
processes classified information.

A.2 Optional Checklist Material
The six questions included in the Appendix A checklist is only the minimum set of
questions on which a national security designation may be based. Individual departments
and agencies may choose to include additional questions so long as the decision
regarding designation of a system as a national security system is based exclusively on
the definition provided in Section 2.0 of this guideline. Examples of questions that a
department or agency may employ to provide clarification, amplification, and/or
justification follow:

      •    Does this system process, store, or transmit military plans?
      •    Does this system process, store, or transmit information on weapon systems?
      •    Does this system process, store, or transmit information regarding military
           operations?
      •    Does this system process, store, or transmit information on intelligence activities,
           sources or methods?
      •    Does this system involve cryptologic activities related to national security?
      •    Does this system process, store, or transmit information regarding foreign
           relations or foreign activities?
      •    Does this system process, store, or transmit information regarding scientific,
           technological, or economic matters relating to national security, including defense
           against transnational terrorism?
      •    Does this system involve programs for safeguarding nuclear materials or
           facilities?
      •    Does this system process, store, or transmit information on weapons of mass
           destruction?
      •    Does this system process, store, or transmit information on vulnerabilities or
           capabilities of systems, installations, infrastructures, projects, plans, or protection
           services relating to national security, including defense against transnational
           terrorism?
8
    See Glossary definition for classified information.

SP 800-59                                                                                          PAGE 9
                                                                                    Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                                                    System as a National Security System


     •    Is the information on this system classified in accordance with one or more of
          your agency's classification guides?



A.3 Checklist

                   National Security System Identification Checklist
System Identification:


                                                                                                                 ---
(Answer each question in the box provided to the right of the question. Answer yes or no.
                                                                                                                 (1)
(1) Does the function, operation, or use of the system involve intelligence
activities?
                                                                                                                 (2)
(2) Does the function, operation, or use of the system involve cryptologic
activities related to national security?
                                                                                                                 (3)
(3) Does the function, operation, or use of the system involve military command
and control of military forces?
                                                                                                                 (4)
(4) Does the function, operation, or use of the system involve equipment that is
an integral part of a weapon or
   weapons system?
                                                                                                                 (5)
(5) If the use of the system is not routine administrative or business applications,
     is the system critical to the direct fulfillment of military or intelligence
    missions?
                                                                                                                 (6)
(6) Does the system store, process, or communicate classified information?


If the answer to any of the six questions is “Yes”, then the system is a national security system.
 Is this system a national security system?

Organization of Respondent:                     Address of Organization:



                                                                                          Telephone:____________
Name of Respondent:                             Signature of Respondent:                                  Date:
                                                                                                                 (dd/mm/yy)




SP 800-59                                                                                                         PAGE 10
                                                           Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                           System as a National Security System




Appendix B: References

[10 USC Ch 18]       Title 10, United States Code, Chapter 18 – Military Support for
                     Civilian Law Enforcement Activities.

[15 USC 278g-3]      Title 15, United States Code, Chapter 7 – National Institute of
                     Standards and Technology, Section 278g-3 – Information Systems
                     Standards Program.

[40 USC Subt III]    Title 40, United States Code, Subtitle III – Information
                     Technology Management, Section 11101 – Definitions, and
                     Section 1103 – Applicability to National Security Systems, Public
                     Law 107-217, 8/21/02 [codified the Clinger-Cohen Act].

[44 USC Ch 35(I)]    Title 44, United States Code, Chapter 35 - Coordination of Federal
                     Information Policy, Subchapter I - Federal Information Policy,
                     Sec. 3502 - Definitions.

[44 USC Ch 35(III)] Title 44, United States Code, Chapter 35 – Coordination of
                    Federal Information Policy, Subchapter III - Information Security,
                    Sec. 3542 - Definitions, Public Law 107-347,12/17/02.

[47 USC Ch 5]        Title 47, United States Code, Chapter 5 – Wire or Radio
                     Communications, Subchapter I – General Provisions, Sec. 153 ­
                     Definitions.

[50 USC Ch 15]       Title 50, United States Code, Chapter 15 – National Security,
                     Section 401a – Definitions.

[ANSDIT]             American National Standard Dictionary of Information
                     Technology (ANSDIT). (Approved April 5, 2002)
                     (Revision and redesignation of ANSI X3.172-1996).

[CNSS 4009]          CNSS Instruction No. 4009, National Information Assurance
                     Glossary, Committee for National Security Systems

[Crypto Pub 1-0]     National Cryptologic Doctrine, Cryptology, Cryptologic
                     Publication 1-0, National Security Agency October 1, 2001.

[EO 12863]           President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, Executive Order
                     12863, 9/13/93.




SP 800-59                                                                                PAGE 11
                                                          Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                          System as a National Security System


[EO 13292]         Classified National Security Information, Executive Order 13292,
                   March 25, 2003. [Amends Executive Order 12958]

[EO 12333]         United States Intelligence Activities, Executive Order 12333,
                   December 8, 1981

[FISMA]            Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002, Public
                   Law 107-347, Title III, 12/17/02.

[HSA]              Homeland Security Act of 2002, Public Law 107-296, Title II –
                   Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection, Subtitle A –
                   Directorate for Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection:
                   Access to Information, Section 202 – Access to Information,
                   11/25/02.

[Joint Pub 1-02]   Department of Defense Dictionary of Military and Associated
                   Terms, Joint Publication 1-02, Rev. 8/14/02.

[T1.523]           Telcom Glossary 2000, American National Standards Institute,
                   ANS T1.523-2001, 2001




SP 800-59                                                                               PAGE 12
                                                                 Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                                 System as a National Security System




Appendix C: Glossary of Terms

Definitions of terms provided in this glossary have been extracted from public laws,
Executive Branch publications and orders, and American National Standards Institute
publications.

Agency ­                  The term 'agency' means any executive department, military
[44 USC 3502 (1)]         department, government corporation, government controlled
                          corporation, or other establishment in the executive branch of the
                          government (including the Executive Office of the President), or
                          any independent regulatory agency, but does not include ­
                                 (a) the General Accounting Office;
                                 (b) Federal Election Commission;
                                 (c) the governments of the District of Columbia and of the
                                     territories and possessions of the United States, and
                                     their various subdivisions; or
                                 (d) Government-owned contractor-operated facilities,
                                      including laboratories engaged in national defense
                                      research and production activities.

Availability ­            As defined in FISMA, the term 'availability' means ensuring timely
[44 USC 3542 (b)(1)(C)]   and reliable access to and use of information.

Authentication ­          Security measures designed to establish the validity of a
[CNSS 4009]               transmission, message, or originator, or a means of verifying an
                          individual’s authorization to receive specific categories of
                          information.

Classified Information –
[E.O. 13292]          Classified information or classified national security information
                      means information that has been determined pursuant to E. O.
                      12958 as amended by E.O. 13292 or any predecessor order to
                      require protection against unauthorized disclosure and is marked to
                      indicate its classified status when in documentary form.

Command and Control –
[Joint Pub 1-02]   'Command and Control' is the exercise of authority and direction
                   by a properly designated commander over assigned and attached
                   forces in the accomplishment of the mission. Command and
                   control functions are performed through an arrangement of
                   personnel, equipment, communications, facilities, and procedures
                   employed by a commander in planning, directing, coordinating,
                   and controlling forces and operations in the accomplishment of the
                   mission.


SP 800-59                                                                                      PAGE 13
                                                                  Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                                  System as a National Security System


Confidentiality -         The term 'confidentiality' means preserving authorized restrictions
[44 USC 3542 (b)(1)(B)]   on access and disclosure, including means for protecting personal
                          privacy and proprietary information.

Counterintelligence –
[50 USC 401a]             The term 'counterintelligence' means information gathered and
                          activities conducted to protect against espionage, other intelligence
                          activities, sabotage, or assassinations conducted by or on behalf of
                          foreign governments or elements thereof, foreign organizations, or
                          foreign persons, or international terrorist activities.

Cryptography -            The discipline that embodies the principles, means, and methods
[ANSDIT]                  for the transformation of data in order to hide their semantic
                          content, prevent their unauthorized use, or prevent their undetected
                          modification.


Cryptologic -             The term 'cryptologic' means of or pertaining to cryptology.
[Joint Pub 1-02]


Cryptology -              Originally the field encompassing both cryptography and
[Crypto Pub 1-0]          cryptanalysis. Today, cryptology in the U.S. Government is the
                          collection and/or exploitation of foreign communications and non-
                          communications emitters, known as SIGINT; and solutions,
                          products, and services, to ensure the availability, integrity,
                          authentication, confidentiality, and non-repudiation of national
                          security telecommunications and information systems, known as
                          IA.

Executive Agency -        An executive department specified in 5 U.S.C., Section 101; a
[41 USC 403]              military department specified in 5 U.S.C., Section 102; an
                          independent establishment as defined in 5 U.S.C., Section 104(1);
                          and a wholly owned Government corporation fully subject to the
                          provisions of 31 U.S.C. Chapter 91.

Federal Information System–
[40 USC 101]         An information system used or operated by an executive agency,
                     by a contractor of an executive agency, or by another organization
                     on behalf of an executive agency.

Independent Regulatory Agency –
[44 USC 3502 (5)]    The term 'independent regulatory agency' means the Board of
                     Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Commodity Futures
                     Trading Commission, the Consumer Product Safety Commission,
                     the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Deposit
                     Insurance Corporation, the Federal Energy Regulatory
                     Commission, the Federal Housing Finance Board, the Federal

SP 800-59                                                                                       PAGE 14
                                                               Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                               System as a National Security System


                         Maritime Commission, the Federal Trade Commission, the
                         Interstate Commerce Commission, the Mine Enforcement Safety
                         and Health Review Commission, the National Labor Relations
                         Board, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, the Occupational
                         Safety and Health Review Commission, the Postal Rate
                         Commission, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and any
                         other similar agency designated by statute as a Federal independent
                         regulatory agency or commission.

Information ­            1. Facts, data, or instructions in any medium or form. 2. The
[Joint Pub 1-02]         meaning that a human assigns to data by means of the known
                         conventions used in their representation.

Information Assurance –
[CNSS 4009]          Measures that protect and defend information and information
                     systems by ensuring their availability, integrity, authentication,
                     confidentiality, and non-repudiation. These measures include
                     providing for restoration of information systems by incorporating
                     protection, detection, and reaction capabilities.

Information Resources –
[44 USC 3502 (6)]    The term 'information resources' means information and related
                     resources, such as personnel, equipment, funds, and information
                     technology.

Information Security ­
[44 USC 3542 (b)(1)]     The term 'information security' means protecting information and
                         information systems from unauthorized access, use, disclosure,
                         disruption, modification, or destruction in order to provide
                         integrity, confidentiality, and availability.

Information System - The term 'information system' means a discrete set of information
[44 USC 3502 (8)]    resources organized for the collection, processing, maintenance,
                     use, sharing, dissemination, or disposition of information.

Information Technology –
[40 USC 11101 (6)]   The term 'information technology', with respect to an executive
                     agency means any equipment or interconnected system or
                     subsystem of equipment, that is used in the automatic acquisition,
                     storage, manipulation, management, movement, control, display,
                     switching, interchange, transmission, or reception of data or
                     information by the executive agency. For purposes of the
                     preceding sentence, equipment is used by an executive agency if
                     the equipment is used by the executive agency directly or is used
                     by a contractor under a contract with the executive agency which



SP 800-59                                                                                    PAGE 15
                                                                   Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                                   System as a National Security System


                          (i) requires the use of such equipment, or (ii) requires the use, to a
                          significant extent, of such equipment in the performance of a
                          service or the furnishing of a product. The term ''information
                          technology'' includes computers, ancillary equipment, software,
                          firmware and similar procedures, services (including support
                          services), and related resources. The term ''information
                          technology'' does not include any equipment that is acquired by a
                          Federal contractor incidental to a Federal contract.

Integrity ­               The term 'integrity' means guarding against improper information
[44 USC 3542 (b)(1)(A)]   modification or destruction, and includes ensuring information
                          non-repudiation and authenticity.

Intelligence ­            The term 'intelligence' means (1) the product resulting from the
[Joint Pub 1-02]          collection, processing, integration, analysis, evaluation, and
[50 USC Ch 15]            interpretation of available information concerning foreign
                          countries or areas; or (2) information and knowledge about an
                          adversary obtained through observation, investigation, analysis, or
                          understanding. The term 'intelligence' includes foreign intelligence
                          and counterintelligence.

Intelligence Activities –
[EO 12333]              The term 'intelligence activities' includes all activities that agencies
                        within the Intelligence Community are authorized to conduct
                        pursuant to Executive Order 12333, United States Intelligence
                        Activities.

Intelligence Community –
[EO 12333]          The term 'intelligence community' refers to the following agencies
                    or organizations:
                    (1) The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA);
                    (2) The National Security Agency (NSA);
                    (3) The Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA);
                    (4) The offices within the Department of Defense for the collection
                    of specialized national foreign intelligence through reconnaissance
                    programs;
                    (5) The Bureau of Intelligence and Research of the Department of
                    State;
                    (6) The int elligence elements of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and
                    Marine Corps, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), the
                    Department of the Treasury, and the Department of Energy; and
                    (7) The staff elements of the Director of Central Intelligence.

Non-repudiation -         Assurance the sender of data is provided with proof of delivery and
[CNSS 4009]               the recipient is provided with proof of the sender’s identity, so
                          neither can later deny having processed the data.


SP 800-59                                                                                        PAGE 16
                                                           Guideline for Identifying an Information
                                                           System as a National Security System




Public Information - The term 'public information' means any information, regardless of
[44 USC 3502 (12)]   form or format, that an agency discloses, disseminates, or makes
                     available to the public.

Telecommunications –
[47 USC 5 153]      The term 'telecommunications' means the transmission, between or
                    among points specified by the user, of information of the user's
                    choosing, without change in the form or content of the information
                    as sent and received.


Weapons System -     A 'weapons system' is a combination of one or more weapons with
[Joint Pub 1-02]     all related equipment, materials, services, personnel, and means of
                     delivery and deployment (if applicable) required for self-
                     sufficiency.




SP 800-59                                                                                PAGE 17
