2018 ANNUAL REPORT
  NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM




                 NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 800-206
ANNUAL REPORT 2018
NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM
     PATRICK O’REILLY, EDITOR                   KRISTINA RIGOPOULOS, EDITOR
     Computer Security Division                   Applied Cybersecurity Division
 Information Technology Laboratory             Information Technology Laboratory

                                   CO-EDITORS:
                                  Larry Feldman
                                    Greg Witte
                             G2, Incorporated (“G2”)
                          a Huntington Ingalls Company
                          Annapolis Junction, Maryland


THIS PUBLICATION IS AVAILABLE FREE OF CHARGE FROM
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-206



JANUARY 2020




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
Wilbur L. Ross, Jr., Secretary


NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
Walter Copan, NIST Director and Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
AUTHORITY
This publication has been developed by NIST in accordance with its statutory
responsibilities under the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of
2014, 44 U.S.C. § 3551 et seq., Public Law (P.L.) 113-283. NIST is responsible for developing
information security standards and guidelines, including minimum requirements for
federal information systems, but such standards and guidelines shall not apply to
national security systems without the express approval of appropriate federal officials
exercising policy authority over such systems. This guideline is consistent with the
requirements of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130.
Nothing in this publication should be taken to contradict the standards and guidelines
made mandatory and binding on federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under
statutory authority. Nor should these guidelines be interpreted as altering or superseding
the existing authorities of the Secretary of Commerce, Director of the OMB, or any other
federal official. This publication may be used by nongovernmental organizations on a
voluntary basis and is not subject to copyright in the United States. Attribution would,
however, be appreciated by NIST.
National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-206
Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 800-206, 31 pages (January 2020)
CODEN: NSPUE2
This publication is available free of charge from:
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-206



REPORTS ON COMPUTER SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY
The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical
leadership for the Nation’s measurement and standards infrastructure. ITL develops
tests, test methods, reference data, proof of concept implementations, and technical
analyses to advance the development and productive use of information technology.
ITL’s responsibilities include the development of management, administrative, technical,
and physical standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of other
than national security-related information in federal information systems. The Special
Publication 800-series reports on ITL’s research, guidelines, and outreach efforts in
information system security, and its collaborative activities with industry, government,
and academic organizations.




                                                                                                I


                               NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
     DISCLAIMER
     Any mention of commercial products or organizations is for informational purposes only;
     it is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of
     Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the products identified are
     necessarily the best available for the purpose.



     TRADEMARK INFORMATION
     All names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners.




II


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
FOREWORD
Cybersecurity: Picking up the pace

“The more things change, the more they stay the same.” (From a French proverb)
Ten years ago, the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) annual
report on cybersecurity featured accomplishments and challenges in quantum
computing, encryption, identity management, personal identity verification,
vulnerability measurements, assessing the security controls in federal information
systems, mobile devices, international standardization, and addressing the needs of
small and medium-sized businesses, all of which were among the many pressing topics
of the day. Sound familiar?
Reviewing those topics in the NIST Fiscal Year 2008 report on computer security
activities and accomplishments might lead some to conclude that the old French
proverb is true when it comes to cybersecurity. But in this case, a more appropriate
statement might be, “The more things appear to stay the same, the more quickly they
actually change.”
That certainly is true for the threat environment in which we function today. New attack
surfaces, new vulnerabilities, and new attackers emerge constantly. The creativity,
the dramatically increased frequency of attacks, and the ready availability of new
technologically enhanced modes of attack are even more difficult to identify—much
less protect, detect, respond to, and recover from—before they inflict great harm to U.S.
organizations and our economy, security, and society in general.
A decade later, these changes have enormous implications in a world that is so much
more dependent on digital devices, systems, and connectivity for carrying out both the
specialized and ordinary activities that drive our economy and safeguard our security.
They create thorny challenges as we seek balance in battling attacks and attackers while
preserving our intellectual property, privacy, civil rights, and liberties.
The speed with which our cybersecurity risks change means that everyone involved in
managing those risks needs to pick up the pace. That is what NIST is doing with the help
of many partners and through varied programs and approaches.
In Fiscal Year 2018, we received and worked on new cybersecurity-related assignments
from Congress and the President. Those have led us to focus our attention on assisting
small businesses, forging practical solutions to address security concerns raised by the
Internet of Things, and updating our guidance on risk management and security controls
for federal agencies and others. We also launched major new initiatives, including the
development of a voluntary framework for privacy risk management, standards for


                                                                                            III


                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
     post-quantum cryptography, and revisions to Federal Information Processing Standard
     (FIPS) 140-3,1 Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules.
     One thing has remained constant over the past decade: our commitment to cultivating
     trust in information and the technology that drives the development and handling
     of that information. This annual report focuses on some of NIST’s most noteworthy
     cybersecurity achievements in 2018 and offers insights into our current priorities
     and strategies. For a more complete review of our work, check out our primary
     cybersecurity website.2
     NIST welcomes all suggestions for how we can improve our cybersecurity work to
     better serve the public and private sectors. And, by all means, please join us as we pick
     up the pace.




                                   Donna F. Dodson
                                   NIST Chief Cybersecurity Advisor




IV       Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 140-3, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/fips/140/3/final
     1

     2
         NIST Cybersecurity, https://www.nist.gov/topics/cybersecurity


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  1


Imperative 1 – Advancing Cybersecurity and Privacy Standards .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3


Imperative 2 – Enhancing Risk Management  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5


Imperative 3 – Strengthening Cryptographic Standards and Validation  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 8


Imperative 4 – Advancing Cybersecurity Research
               and Applications Development .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  12


Imperative 5 – Improving Cybersecurity Awareness, Training, Education,
               and Workforce Development  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  15


Imperative 6 – Enhancing Identity and Access Management .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  19


Imperative 7 – Bolstering Infrastructure Protection  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 21


Imperative 8 – Securing Emerging Technologies .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  24


Imperative 9 – Advancing Security Test and Measurement Tools  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  29




                                                                                                                                                           V


                                                   NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
INTRODUCTION
It is often said that cybersecurity is about people, process, and technology. That’s a
convenient way to think about cybersecurity challenges, and it is the primary approach
that the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) takes in carrying out its
cybersecurity mission. This report highlights NIST’s Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 cybersecurity-
related accomplishments and includes many examples of how the NIST Information
Technology Laboratory (ITL) delivers value to the nation by focusing on each element
of the people, process, and technology triad. Importantly, NIST strives to address those
three areas in an integrated fashion, knowing that siloed thinking about cybersecurity is
not a viable path to success.
NIST carries out its cybersecurity responsibilities through an open, transparent, and
inclusive approach, teaming with organizations in the private sector, non-profit sphere,
academia, and government at multiple levels. It does so by cooperating with partners in
the United States and abroad who contribute to the research, development, standards,
and applications that are all needed to advance both the state-of-the-art and the state-
of-practice when it comes to cybersecurity. NIST is also assisted in identifying emerging
managerial, technical, administrative, and physical safeguard issues by the Information
Security and Privacy Advisory Board (ISPAB).3 ISPAB is the Federal Advisory Committee4
that advises NIST, the Secretaries of Commerce and Homeland Security, and the Office of
Management and Budget on security and privacy matters.
All of NIST’s cybersecurity work is conducted in an environment that demands
technical excellence and integrity and that aims to cultivate trust in technologies and
institutions. NIST’s portfolio of cybersecurity programs works along the full spectrum
of cybersecurity challenges and potential, from foundational research to applied
engineering and transition to practice.
NIST knows that improving all aspects of cybersecurity is an imperative, not just for the
agency but for all of society that relies on technologies, products, and systems. NIST’s
FY18 premier cybersecurity accomplishments and brief insights into FY19 priorities are
captured in the cybersecurity imperatives that follow.




3
     harter of the Information Security and Privacy Advisory Board (ISPAB), https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/
    C
    Projects/ISPAB/documents/ispab_charter_2016-2018.pdf
4
     ederal Advisory Committee Act, https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title5/title5a/
    F                                                                                                            1
    node2&edition=prelim


                                         NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
    INTRODUCTION




       FROM STATE-OF-THE-ART TO STATE-OF-ACTUAL PRACTICE
       NIST’s research, standards, guidelines, and recommended best practices are
       aimed at improving the effectiveness of cybersecurity strategies and measures.
       They offer an expanding and up-to-date toolkit that information technology
       (IT) and operational technology (OT) providers and users can put to work to
       justifiably enhance trust in IT and related technologies. Historically, much of
       NIST’s outputs have been developed primarily for government agencies that are
       directed by statute and policy to use the Institute’s cybersecurity standards and
       guidelines. However, they also are widely and voluntarily relied upon by private
       sector cybersecurity practitioners, product vendors and integrators, state and
       local agencies, and others who see value in NIST’s information and services.
       NIST recognizes that many systems owners and administrators often find it
       difficult to sort through the voluminous output of NIST cybersecurity guidance to
       identify standards and guidelines that apply to their areas of interest. They may
       struggle to understand how these resources apply to their environments and
       how NIST’s cybersecurity products can be used to address their requirements.
       They may have difficulty with usability implications of integrating cybersecurity
       into their systems. These current and potential users need assistance in finding
       the kind of applications support that NIST offers in addressing some specific
       cybersecurity implementation problems. In FY18, NIST increased its attention to
       issues associated with transition to practice with an eye on accelerating adoption
       of cybersecurity standards, guidelines, and best practices. NIST is ramping up
       that priority even more steeply in 2019, often through the National Cybersecurity
       Center of Excellence (NCCoE) as well as throughout the Information Technology
       Laboratory (ITL). This report spotlights some of those initiatives.




2


    NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
    IMPERATIVE 1
    Advancing Cybersecurity and Privacy Standards

    NIST leverages foundational and applied research as well as extensive experience
    acquired through decades of leadership and participation in developing national and
    international standards to advance cybersecurity and privacy standards. Today, these
    standards activities span cybersecurity, privacy, and cryptography, as well as newer and
    emerging technology spaces such as Artificial Intelligence and the Internet of Things.
    About 40 NIST staff work with industry and other agencies to develop cybersecurity and
    privacy standards through voluntary consensus Standards Developing Organizations
    (SDOs). The NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) has provided additional focus and a
    systematic approach to standards work in this space. This international standards
    strategy follows the guidelines defined in NISTIR 8074, Cybersecurity Interagency Report
    on Strategic U.S. Government Engagement in International Standardization to Achieve
    U.S. Objectives for Cybersecurity.




                   Figure 1. NIST staff participation in cybersecurity standards activities




3                                                                                              3


                                     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
    IMPERATIVE 1 — Advancing Cybersecurity and Privacy Standards



    During FY18, NIST staff actively contributed to and held leadership positions in various
    SDOs, including the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), the International
    Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission
    (IEC), the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the Internet
    Engineering Task Force (IETF), the T Trusted Computing Group (TCG), the World Wide
    Web Consortium (W3C), and the 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP). Many of the
    international SDOs have domestic counterparts. Figure 1, on the previous page; indicates
    the SDOs in which NIST is actively engaged.
    NIST staff have been actively participating in ISO standards bodies to raise awareness
    and influence the development of privacy standards, including a new family of
    ISO standards (developed primarily in ISO/IEC Joint Technical Committee (JTC 1)/
    Subcommittee (SC) 27) that is aligned with the principles of the NIST Cybersecurity
    Framework. Notably, NIST staff participates in the Technical Committee ISO/Program
    Committee (PC) 317 – Consumer Protection: Privacy by Design for Consumer Goods
    and Services, which focuses on developing ISO 31700 Consumer protection: Privacy by
    Design for Consumer Goods and Services. NIST staff has also been engaged with several
    privacy standards activities of the ITC 1/SC 27/Working Group (WG) 5. By participating,
    NIST aims to sustain and promote the development and use of the NIST Privacy
    Framework and its principles in the international arena.
    NIST participation has also grown considerably in Internet of Things (IoT)
    standardization activities, including JTC 1/SC 41 (IoT architecture and vocabulary,
    IoT Interoperability, and IoT Applications), JTC 1/SC 27 (IoT aspects of Security and
    Privacy), IETF – SW Updates for IoT, and the International Telecommunications
    Union–Telecommunication Standardization Sector (ITU-T): Sector Joint Coordination
    Activity on IoT and “IoT and Smart Cities.” NIST has been instrumental in promoting
    and participating in the development of a family of voluntary ISO standards that align
    with NIST’s cryptographic module validation standard and related specifications.
    NIST serves as the project editor for nine of those standards. FIPS 140-3, Security
    Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, points to ISO/IEC 19790, Security
    Requirements for Cryptographic Modules. Testing for these requirements will be
    performed in accordance with ISO/IEC 24759, Test Requirements for Cryptographic
    Modules. This is an ongoing effort and will continue over the next several years to
    support a smooth transition path to those using FIPS 140-3 specifications.
    In FY19, NIST staff will continue to lead and participate in cybersecurity and privacy
    standardization efforts with an increased focus on cybersecurity, privacy, and
    cryptography, as well as on new and emerging areas such as Artificial Intelligence and
    the Internet of Things. NIST will continue to provide thoughtful leadership in many SDOs
    by actively participating in those organizations and contributing publications and papers.




4


    NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
IMPERATIVE 2
Enhancing Risk Management

Increasingly, NIST’s work is driven by a recognition that risk management should
be a fundamental driver for every organization’s decisions about investments in
cybersecurity—whether those investments take shape as people, processes, or
technology. NIST considers managing risk to be an essential principle and process
for organizations of any size or type to employ in planning and carrying out their
cybersecurity programs and in making decisions about priorities.
During FY18, NIST made significant strides in producing cybersecurity risk management
approaches and tools and assisting organizations in their use. Most notably, these
achievements included:
  •   Release of the first update of the Framework for Improving Critical
      Infrastructure Cybersecurity, popularly known as simply the “Cybersecurity
      Framework.” First produced in February 2014 with the active involvement of
      hundreds of organizations in the private and public sectors, Version 1.1 was
      released in April 2018. Based on the experience of Framework users and changes
      in the cybersecurity environment and technological advances, the revision
      added more content related to supply chain risk management and coordinated
      vulnerability disclosure. NIST added and clarified language regarding cybersecurity
      measurement with an emphasis on self-assessment. The number of downloads of
      Version 1.1 has far surpassed that of the initial version.
      Recognizing and seeking to further stimulate international usage of the
      Cybersecurity Framework, NIST worked on a Spanish language translation, which
      is now available along with translations or adaptations provided by government
      agencies and industry leaders in Italian, Japanese, Hebrew, Arabic, and
      Portuguese. NIST also engaged more purposefully to promote the alignment and
      use of the Framework, especially in Latin America and Europe. In the international
      standards arena, NIST vigorously assisted in efforts to include the Framework into
      a key International Organization for Standardization (ISO) cybersecurity standard,
      a process that is still under way.
      In addition, NIST included many more resources to aid in using the Cybersecurity
      Framework, many of which were generated by private sector, non-profit, and
      government organizations. NIST also launched a series of “Success Stories”
      highlighting the variety of ways in which organizations of all types and in all
      sectors are finding value in the Framework. Also in FY18, NIST recognized that
      new information products and tools are regularly being produced well beyond
      the initial Informative References included in Version 1.0 and pushed forward with
      an initiative that establishes a transparent, equitable process for organizations to
      propose new references, which are intended to be included as online Informative
      References associated with the Framework.
                                                                                             5


                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
    IMPERATIVE 2 – Enhancing Risk Management



            •    Update of the NIST Risk Management Framework (RMF). For years, the RMF
                 has been a mainstay for federal agencies and others to use in assessing and
                 managing cybersecurity needs and challenges. Two drafts of the new version
                 were produced in FY18—NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-37, Revision 25—
                 before becoming final in early FY19. Updates included significant new guidance
                 in addressing privacy risks and integrating security and privacy into the
                 design of systems. The RMF also references NIST systems security engineering
                 guidance at appropriate points, including NIST SP 800-160,6 which addresses the
                 engineering of trustworthy secure systems.
                 The revised RMF also offers additional guidance on:
                 •   Better preparing an organization’s senior leaders to execute the RMF, as well
                     as how to communicate their protection plans and risk management strategies
                     to system implementers and operators.
                 •   Incorporating supply chain risk management considerations. The RMF now
                     addresses growing supply chain concerns, such as counterfeit components,
                     tampering, theft, insertion of malicious software and hardware, poor
                     manufacturing and development practices, and other potentially harmful
                     activities that can impact an organization’s systems and systems components.
                 •   Supporting security and privacy safeguards. The RMF update provides
                     organizations with a disciplined and structured process to select controls
                     from the newly developed consolidated security and privacy control catalog
                     in NIST’s SP 800-53 Revision 5.7 This should be valuable to companies and
                     organizations beyond the federal government, considering how high profile the
                     subject of privacy has become as of late.
    Importantly, the revised RMF clarifies its relationship to the Cybersecurity Framework.
    Aligning the RMF with other NIST guidance and publications will help federal agencies
    which are required to implement multiple frameworks. While adhering to the CSF is
    voluntary for private companies, its use for the federal government is not optional
    under Executive Order 13800.8 Use of the RMF is mandatory for federal agencies in
    accordance with the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA9). The RMF
    is also required and in widespread use in the Department of Defense and the intelligence


    5 
        Special Publication (SP) 800-37, Rev. 2, Risk Management Framework for Information Systems and Organizations: A
        System Life Cycle Approach for Security and Privacy, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-37/rev-2/final
    6
           SP
           
               800-160, Vol. 2, Developing Cyber Resilient Systems: A Systems Security Engineering Approach, https://csrc.
           nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-160/vol-2/draft
    7
        SP
        
           800-53, Rev. 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information Systems and Organizations, https://csrc.nist.gov/
        publications/detail/sp/800-53/rev-5/draft
    8
           Presidential
           
                        Executive Order on Strengthening the Cybersecurity of Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure,
           https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/presidential-executive-order-strengthening-cybersecurity-
6          federal-networks-critical-infrastructure/
    9
           Federal
           
                   Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA), https://www.dhs.gov/fisma


    NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
                                                                   IMPERATIVE 2 – Enhancing Risk Management



community. That alignment of the Cybersecurity Framework and the RMF is still a work
in progress with NIST committed to producing improved guidance in 2019.
     •    Systems Security Engineering: Considerations for a Multidisciplinary Approach
          in the Engineering of Trustworthy Secure Systems. The FY18 update of this
          publication addresses the engineering-driven perspective and actions necessary to
          develop more defensible and survivable systems, including the machine, physical,
          and human components that compose the systems as well as the capabilities and
          services delivered by those systems. It builds upon well-established international
          standards for systems and software and fuses systems security engineering
          methods, practices, and techniques. The objective is to address security
          issues from the perspective of stakeholder protection needs, concerns, and
          requirements using established engineering processes to ensure that those needs
          are addressed with appropriate fidelity and rigor early on and in a sustainable
          manner throughout the life cycle of the system. NIST also published a draft of the
          first in a series of specialty publications developed to support the flagship NIST
          Systems Security Engineering guideline. Volume 2 addresses cyber resiliency
          considerations for two important yet distinct communities of interest represented
          by organizations: those conducting new development of IT component products,
          systems, and services; and those with legacy systems (installed base) currently
          carrying out day-to-day missions and business functions.
     •    Privacy Framework: An Enterprise Risk Management Tool. There is growing
          concern regarding privacy issues across the country and throughout the
          world. Government organizations are putting into place multiplying privacy
          requirements that cross borders in their implementation. That is why in FY18,
          NIST laid the groundwork for developing a risk management-driven approach
          that could be used by any organization that chooses to do so. The Privacy
          Framework project, announced in September 2018 and expected to result in a
          final Framework by late 2019, is being carried out based on the same type and
          degree of extensive private-public sector collaboration that led to the widely
          regarded Cybersecurity Framework.
Other risk management-focused NIST cybersecurity accomplishments in FY18 included
an update of NIST’s recommendations for protecting the confidentiality of controlled,
unclassified information (CUI) in non-federal systems and organizations. Safeguarding
that CUI is of paramount importance and can directly affect the ability of federal
agencies to successfully conduct their assigned missions and business operations.
NIST SP 800-171 Revision 110 recommends security requirements to those agencies. The
FY18 update included editorial changes to select CUI security requirements, additional
references and definitions, and an expanded discussion about each CUI requirement.




10
     SP
     
        800-171, Rev. 1, Protecting Controlled Unclassified Information in Nonfederal Systems and Organizations,   7
     https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-171/rev-1/final


                                         NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
    IMPERATIVE 3
    Strengthening Cryptographic Standards and Validation

    Cryptography—the technological foundation for most cybersecurity functions—
    is constantly under attack by a multiplying array of adversaries that range from
    individual criminals seeking financial gains to terrorist groups and nation states. If the
    cryptographic protection for an organization’s information technology is defeated or
    bypassed, the organization—and, potentially, our nation’s entire infrastructure system—
    may be wide open to malicious attack.
    NIST is responsible for developing U.S. federal cryptographic standards as well as the
    technologies and programs used to determine and validate correct implementation of
    those standards. This has been a mainstay of NIST’s computer security work for nearly 50
    years. In FY18, NIST continued to work with partners in government, the private sector,
    and academia in the United States and around the globe to confront a variety of urgent
    technical and implementation challenges to cryptographic security. These included:
          •   Post-Quantum Cryptography. In recent years, there has been a substantial amount
              of research on quantum computers—machines that exploit quantum mechanical
              phenomena to solve mathematical problems that are difficult or intractable for
              conventional computers. If large-scale quantum computers are ever built, they will
              be able to break many of the public key cryptosystems currently in use, seriously
              compromising the confidentiality and integrity of digital data. During FY18, NIST
              continued to prioritize work on post-quantum cryptography (also called quantum-
              resistant cryptography) with the ambitious goal of developing cryptographic
              systems that are secure against both quantum and classical computers and can
              interoperate with existing communications protocols and networks.
              After an earlier call to the public to submit post-quantum algorithms11 that
              could resist a quantum computer’s onslaught, from FY18 to FY19 NIST worked
              with the larger cryptography community to narrow the field from 69 submitted
              algorithms to 26. The remaining algorithms are those which NIST mathematicians
              and computer scientists consider to be the strongest candidates. Next, NIST is
              asking the cryptography community to focus on analyzing how these algorithms
              will perform in the real world (e.g., how they will fit into the internet protocols
              currently in use). This second round of analysis focuses more heavily on evaluating
              the submissions’ performance across a wide variety of systems, not just in big
              computers and smartphones.




8   11
         NIST
         
               Asks Public to Help Future-Proof Electronic Information, https://www.nist.gov/news-events/news/2016/12/
         nist-asks-public-help-future-proof-electronic-information


    NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
                                      IMPERATIVE 3 – Strengthening Cryptographic Standards And Validation



      •   Lightweight Cryptography. Many different devices and systems—including
          smart cards, tiny devices for IoT use, and individual microchips—need effective
          encryption yet have limited processor power. These devices and systems are
          vital in sensor networks, healthcare, distributed control systems, and cyber
          physical systems. Because the majority of current cryptographic algorithms were
          designed for desktop/server environments, many do not fit into constrained
          devices. Quantum-resistant algorithms that can perform this sort of “lightweight
          cryptography” are sorely needed. In FY18, NIST invited submissions of candidate
          lightweight cryptographic algorithms12 that provide adequate security for
          environments in which processing performance is constrained and where the
          performance of current NIST cryptographic standards is not acceptable. In FY19,
          NIST aims to pare down those candidates for further evaluation and public review.
      •   Responding to and Anticipating Other Technology Developments. Recent
          developments in cryptographic technologies, including the use of blockchain
          techniques, have driven the need for updated cryptographic key establishment
          and implementation guidance. In FY18, NIST released multiple documents
          designed to fulfill those needs. Significant accomplishments included:
          •    Release of random number generation guidelines13 and an online public
               source14 of random numbers
          •    Updated recommendations for best practices for key management
               organization
          •    Additional guidance on transitioning15 to more effective cryptography
          •    Advanced automated testing and validation 16 of the correctness of algorithms
               (see Text Box #3), including introduction of a new protocol to the international
               standards development process
In FY19, NIST will begin revising additional guidance, convene17 a stakeholder workshop
on threshold cryptography, complete development18 of a hardware chip that implements
improved techniques, and continue to work with external collaborators on developing
consensus-based blockchain standards.



12
     Lightweight
     
                 Cryptography Project, https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/lightweight-cryptography
13
     SP
     
        800-90B, Recommendation for the Entropy Sources Used for Random Bit Generation, https://csrc.nist.gov/
     news/2018/nist-announces-the-release-of-sp-800-90b
14
     NIST
     
          Randomness Beacon, Version 2.0 Beta, https://beacon.nist.gov/home
15
     SP
     
        800-131A, Rev. 2, Transitioning the Use of Cryptographic Algorithms and Key Lengths, https://csrc.nist.gov/
     publications/detail/sp/800-131a/rev-2/archive/2018-07-19
16
     Automated
     
               Cryptographic Validation (ACV) Testing, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/itl-bulletin/2018/09/
     automated-cryptographic-validation-testing/final
     Threshold Cryptography, https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/threshold-cryptography                                       9
17   

18
     Circuit
     
             Complexity, https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/circuit-complexity


                                           NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
     IMPERATIVE 3 – Strengthening Cryptographic Standards And Validation




            CRYPTO STANDARD = HUGE $$ IMPACT
            In FY18, NIST released a study19 that estimated a $250 billion economic impact
            from the development of its Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) from 1996-
            2017. AES is a cryptographic algorithm20 to encrypt and decrypt electronic
            information. It was approved for use by the Federal Government in November
            2001 and has since been widely adopted by private industry. Today, AES protects
            everything from classified data and bank transactions to online shopping and
            social media apps. According to the study, NIST’s investment in AES has been
            repaid many times over—the study’s most conservative estimate shows a 29 to 1
            benefit-to-cost ratio for the AES program. The estimated benefit-to-cost ratio for
            the whole economy was 1,976 to 1. The report relied on a survey of government
            and private sector consumers of encryption systems and private integrators who
            develop and produce encryption hardware or software.
            In 1997, NIST launched its effort to identify a new standard encryption algorithm
            for the Federal Government after recognizing that the Data Encryption Standard
            (DES), adopted 20 years earlier, was growing vulnerable in the face of advances
            in cryptanalysis and the exponential growth in computing power. In October
            2000, following a three year, open international competition, NIST announced
            its proposal for the replacement standard: an algorithm submitted by two
            cryptographers from Belgium. The unclassified, publicly disclosed encryption
            algorithm is available royalty-free and is used by the U.S. Federal Government
            in its Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) and voluntarily by private
            organizations worldwide.




     19
          The
          
              Economic Impact of the Advanced Encryption Standard, 1996-2017, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/
10        white-paper/2018/09/07/economic-impacts-of-the-advanced-encryption-standard-1996-2017/final
     20
          FIPS
          
               197, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/fips/197/final


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
                       IMPERATIVE 3 – Strengthening Cryptographic Standards And Validation




AUTOMATING CRYPTOGRAPHIC TESTING
Several years ago, NIST launched a project to automate much of the testing
required under its cryptographic validation programs. Automated cryptographic
algorithm testing was completed in 2018, and NIST is now developing methods to
automate the testing of cryptographic modules. These efforts in automation are
intended to provide a higher trust in the assurance claims made by the product
developers in an efficient and cost-effective manner that allows the vendors’
conformance efforts to keep pace with the changing IT landscape. By investing
in a more robust testing infrastructure, NIST anticipates that product vendors
will take advantage of this service by validating their products more often, which
will produce more secure products. In FY19, NIST will put more responsibility
for generating evidence of conformance in the hands of industry by leveraging
automated test processes that will reduce time to market, slice costs to maintain
compliance, and ensure that the Federal Government has effective and up-to-
date technologies.




                                                                                             11


                          NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
     IMPERATIVE 4
     Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Applications Development

     Beyond cryptography-related priorities, NIST’s cybersecurity research and applications
     development activities include identifying emerging and high-priority technologies,
     developing security solutions that will have a high impact on the U.S. critical information
     infrastructure, and developing and showing how to manage foundational building-block
     security mechanisms and techniques that can be integrated into organizations’ mission-
     critical information systems. Accomplishments included:
          •    Cloud Computing Security and Forensics. During FY18, NIST continued to develop
               publications, promote national and international standards and specifications,
               and demonstrate how to meet those standards and specifications to support the
               effective and secure use of cloud computing.21 NIST collaborated with industry22
               to implement the Cloud Security Architecture Tool (CSAT),23 leveraging the
               NIST Cybersecurity Framework to architect a cloud-based information system
               and identify necessary security controls. Aiding transition to practice, NIST
               collaborated with industry to initiate a cloud security project to show one way
               to increase security and privacy for cloud workloads on hybrid cloud platforms.
               Based on public comments, NIST also updated a guide that shows how to reduce
               opportunities for bad actors to attack enterprises via the cellular and WiFi
               connections on mobile devices; final publication is planned for FY19.24 In addition,
               the Cloud Forensic Science Working Group continued to define a cloud forensics
               reference architecture. Continuation of a trusted cloud capability demonstration,
               CSAT, and forensics activities are planned for FY19.
          •    Low Power Wide Area Networks. Diverse applications of Internet of Things
               and Cyber-physical Systems (IoT/CPS) require various network technologies
               be optimized for specific use cases. A low-power wide-area network (LPWAN)
               is a set of telecommunication specifications and protocols that satisfy both
               low power consumption (i.e., network of inexpensive sensors) and wide area
               coverage (i.e., smart city deployments). In order to build an understanding
               of the security and trust issues of LPWAN-based telecommunications, NIST
               prototyped two use cases for LPWAN-based sensor networks in FY18. The use
               case prototypes included a remote access adapter for a NIST climate monitoring
               station and a real-time tracking system for the NIST Campus Shuttle that was

     21
          NIST
          
               Cloud Computing Program (NCCP), https://www.nist.gov/programs-projects/nist-cloud-computing-
          program-nccp
     22
          SBIR
          
               Success Story: InfoBeyond Technology LLC, https://www.nist.gov/tpo/sbir-success-story-infobeyond-
          technology-llc
     23
          NIST
          
               Cloud Security Architecture Tool (CSAT), https://www.fbcinc.com/e/fitsc/presentations/Iorga-fitsc-csat_
          with_rmfoscal.pdf
12   24
          SP
          
             1800-4, Mobile Device Security: Cloud and Hybrid Builds, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-
          blocks/mobile-device-security/cloud-hybrid


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
                       IMPERATIVE 4 – Advancing Cybersecurity Research And Applications Development



          able to receive sensor data from devices located 5 miles away from the receptor.
          Potential security weaknesses and possible mitigations arising out of this
          experience with LPWAN technology are now being investigated. Researchers
          have learned that WiFi and Bluetooth do not naturally apply to some IoT/CPS
          deployment scenarios, particularly when deployment is outside, requires battery
          operation for extended periods, or must operate over a long range. In FY18, the
          team also deployed an LPWAN Infrastructure that was integrated with NIST’s
          internal network, NIST-Net, satisfying all security policies required by NIST. In
          FY19, the NIST Engineering Laboratory (EL), NIST/ITL, and National Institute of
          Metrology, Standardization and Industrial Quality (INMETRO) team will study
          the implementation of LPWAN on the Smart Grid and investigate LPWAN in the
          context of Smart Grid cybersecurity guidelines.
     •    Open Security Controls Assessment Language (OSCAL). Today, concepts like
          security controls and profiles are largely represented in proprietary ways, making
          it more difficult for many organizations to move forward as quickly as they need
          to in order to take advantage of these approaches. Organizations also often
          struggle with information systems that have many different components. To help
          address these problems, NIST is developing OSCAL—a standard for representing
          different categories of information about the publication, implementation, and
          assessment of security controls. In FY18, NIST completed a control catalog
          and profile schemas and began developing an implementation schema for
          representing system security plans (SSP) in OSCAL. The team validated the
          approach with several use cases. In FY19, NIST will continue to develop other
          approaches involving the Cybersecurity Framework as well as assessments and
          assessment results.
     •    Combating Ransomware. NIST has placed a high priority on identifying and
          demonstrating tools for identifying, protecting against, detecting, responding
          to, and recovering from ransomware attacks and other events that are
          destructive to systems and operations. In FY18, NIST released Data Integrity:
          Recovering from Ransomware and Other Destructive Events (SP 1800-11)25 for
          public comment and initiated two other ransomware projects, Data Integrity:
          Identifying and Protecting Against Ransomware and Other Destructive
          Events26 and Detecting and Responding to Ransomware and Other Destructive
          Events.27 Finalization of SP 1800-11 and development of practice guides for
          the identification and protection and the detection and response projects are
          planned for FY 2019.



25
     SP
     
        1800-11, Data Integrity: Recovering from Ransomware and Other Destructive Events, https://www.nccoe.nist.
     gov/projects/building-blocks/data-integrity/recover
26
     Data
     
          Integrity: Identifying and Protecting Assets Against Ransomware and Other Destructive Events, https://
     www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-blocks/data-integrity/identify-protect
27
     Data
     
          Integrity: Detecting and Responding to Ransomware and Other Destructive Events, https://www.nccoe.nist.   13
     gov/projects/building-blocks/data-integrity/detect-respond


                                         NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
     IMPERATIVE 4 – Advancing Cybersecurity Research And Applications Development



          •    Roots of Trust. Modern computing devices consist of varied hardware, firmware,
               and software components at multiple layers of abstraction. Many security and
               protection mechanisms are rooted in software that, along with all underlying
               components, must be trusted and not tampered with. A vulnerability in any
               of those components could compromise the trustworthiness of the security
               mechanisms that rely upon them. Achieving stronger security assurances may
               be possible by grounding security mechanisms in highly reliable and secure
               hardware, firmware, and software components that perform specific, critical
               security functions. In FY18, NIST built on earlier work focused on protecting
               boot firmware to develop new technical guidelines and recommendations for
               supporting the resiliency of platform firmware and data against potentially
               destructive attacks. Platform Resiliency Guidelines (SP 800-193)28 promotes
               resiliency in platforms by describing security mechanisms for protecting against
               unauthorized changes, detecting unauthorized changes that occur, and securely
               recovering from attacks. In FY19, NIST plans to continue outreach to stakeholders
               to encourage the development of more secure and reliable systems and
               investigate how roots of trust can support other security needs, including supply
               chain assurance.




14
     28
          SP
          
             800-193, Platform Firmware Resiliency Guidelines, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-193/final


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
IMPERATIVE 5
Improving Cybersecurity Awareness, Training, Education,
and Workforce Development

People are often the most underappreciated ingredient in the people, process, and
technology formula that determines an organization’s readiness to understand and deal
with cybersecurity challenges. This includes gaps in users’ and providers’ awareness
about how to access cybersecurity guidelines and tools that apply to their own
operations and environments along with a shortage of people who have the needed
cybersecurity education, training, and experience.
In FY18, NIST placed a greater emphasis on improving the public availability of information
resources by providing them to small businesses in the form of briefings, advancing
awareness and understanding of human factors contributing to cybersecurity challenges,
and recommendations for steps to address workforce shortage and training issues.
FY18 web-accessible information resources included: the Computer Security Resource
Center (CSRC),29 National Software Reference Library (NSRL),30 Security Automation
Reference Data and the National Vulnerability Database (NVD),31 National Checklist
Program (NCP) repository,32 Software Assurance and Quality Software Assurance
Reference Dataset (SARD),33 and Computer Forensics Tool Testing Project tool
catalog34 and reference data sets.35 Ongoing federal outreach efforts include the
Software and Supply Chain Assurance (SSCA) Forum,36 the Federal Computer Security
Managers’ (FCSM) Forum,37 and the Federal Information Systems Security Educators’
Association (FISSEA).38
         •   Cybersecurity for Small Businesses. Small and medium-sized businesses (SMBs)
             represent approximately 95 % of all businesses and are often considered to be the
             backbone of the U.S. economy. Typically faced with limited budgets, SMBs need
             practical resources that enable them to understand and cost-effectively address
             their cybersecurity risks. NIST has been working on behalf of SMBs for many years,

29
     Computer Security Resource Center (CSRC), https://csrc.nist.gov
30
     National
     
              Software Reference Library (NSRL), https://www.nist.gov/software-quality-group/national-software-
     reference-library-nsrl
31
     National
     
              Vulnerability Database (NVD), https://nvd.nist.gov/
32
     National
     
              Checklist Program (NCP) Repository, https://nvd.nist.gov/ncp/repository
33
     NIST
     
          Software Assurance Reference Dataset (SARD) Project, https://samate.nist.gov/sard/
34
     Computer
     
              Forensics Tools and Techniques Catalog, https://toolcatalog.nist.gov/
35
     Computer Forensic Reference Data Sets (CFReDS), https://www.cfreds.nist.gov/
     

36
     Software
     
              and Supply Chain Assurance (SSCA) Forum, https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/cyber-supply-chain-risk-
     management/ssca
37
     Federal
     
             Computer Security Managers’ Forum, https://csrc.nist.gov/events/2018/federal-computer-security-
     managers-forum-2-day                                                                                         15
38
     Federal
     
             Information Security Educators (FISSEA), https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/fissea


                                          NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
     IMPERATIVE 5 – Improving Cybersecurity Awareness, Training, Education, and Workforce Development



               together with interagency and industry partners and collaborators. The NIST
               Small Business Cybersecurity Act, which became law on August 14, 2018, codified
               the Institute’s focus on small businesses. Specifically, the statute directed NIST to
               “disseminate clear and concise resources to help small business concerns identify,
               assess, manage, and reduce their cybersecurity risks.” During FY18, the NIST Small
               Business Outreach Program began updating the Small Business Cybersecurity
               Corner website to make resources easier to find and use. In FY19, those training
               materials and accompanying resources will be expanded based on contributed
               cybersecurity resources and feedback received from federal partners and the public.
          •    National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE). Hosted by NIST, NICE
               seeks to help equip, promote, and energize a robust network of organizations
               that address cybersecurity education, training, and workforce development.
               Efforts to achieve this goal include: 1) accelerating learning and skills development,
               2) nurturing a diverse learning community, and 3) guiding career development and
               workforce planning to achieve each of the objectives identified in the NICE
               Cybersecurity Workforce Framework.39




                                  Figure 2: The Seven Categories of the NICE Framework



               In FY18, fulfilling a directive in Executive Order 13800,40 NICE joined with the
               Department of Homeland Security to prepare a report to the President41 that
               made a series of recommendations. In their transmittal to the President, the
               Commerce and Homeland Security Secretaries noted that “in both the private
               and public sectors, cybersecurity practitioners and educators are vital to our
               national security—especially since other nations are paying greater attention
               to their cybersecurity workforce needs and the cybersecurity weaknesses of
               their adversaries.” The report was based on an analysis of available data and
               the information and views shared by businesses, educational organizations,
               training and certification providers, government agencies at multiple levels,
               and individuals. Findings and specific, forward-thinking, and actionable


     39
          NICE
          
               Cybersecurity Workforce Framework, https://www.nist.gov/itl/applied-cybersecurity/nice/resources/nice-
          cybersecurity-workforce-framework
     40
          Executive
          
                    Order (EO) 13800, Strengthening the Cybersecurity of Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure,
          https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/presidential-executive-order-strengthening-cybersecurity-
          federal-networks-critical-infrastructure/
     41
          A
          
            Report to the President: Supporting the Growth and Sustainment of the Nation’s Cybersecurity Workforce:
16        Building the Foundation for a More Secure American Future, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/white-
          paper/2018/05/30/supporting-growth-and-sustainment-of-the-cybersecurity-workforce/final


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
IMPERATIVE 5 – Improving Cybersecurity Awareness, Training, Education, and Workforce Development



             recommendations addressed both public and private sector needs (see Text Box
             #4). In FY19, the President issued another executive order42 directing agencies to
             implement those recommendations


         CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE RECOMMENDATIONS
         TO THE PRESIDENT
         •   The Nation should set an ambitious vision and action plan-of-attack to
             “prepare, grow, and sustain a national cybersecurity workforce that safeguards
             and promotes America’s national security and economic prosperity.”
         •   The Federal Government should lead in launching a high-profile national
             Call to Action to draw attention to and mobilize public and private sector
             resources to address cybersecurity workforce needs.
         •   The Administration should focus on and recommend long-term authorization
             and sufficient appropriations for high-quality, effective cybersecurity
             education and workforce development programs in its budget proposals in
             order to grow and sustain the cybersecurity workforce.
         •   Federal departments and agencies must move quickly to address major needs
             relating to recruiting, developing, and retaining cybersecurity employees and
             continue to implement the Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Strategy43 and
             the Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act of 2015 (FCWAA).44
         •   The private and public sectors need to transform, elevate, and sustain the
             learning environment to grow a dynamic and diverse cybersecurity workforce.
         •   The private and public sectors need to align education and training with
             employers’ cybersecurity workforce needs, improve coordination, and prepare
             individuals for lifelong careers.
         •   The private and public sectors need to establish and leverage measures
             that demonstrate the effectiveness and impact of cybersecurity
             workforce investments.


             In FY18, the NICE program worked to enhance CyberSeek.45 This tool was
             developed in partnership with industry to help employers, job seekers, policy
             makers, training providers and guidance counselors find information on the supply

42
     Executive
     
               Order on America’s Cybersecurity Workforce, https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/
     executive-order-americas-cybersecurity-workforce/
43
     Federal
     
             Cybersecurity Workforce Strategy, https://chcoc.gov/content/federal-cybersecurity-workforce-strategy
     Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act, https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/senate-bill/2007   17
44   

45
     CyberSeek, https://www.nist.gov/itl/applied-cybersecurity/nice/cyberseek
     




                                        NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
     IMPERATIVE 5 – Improving Cybersecurity Awareness, Training, Education, and Workforce Development



           of workers with relevant credentials and to show career pathways in cybersecurity
           that map opportunities for advancement in the field.
       •   Usability and Cybersecurity. Too often, sound cybersecurity components and
           practices are not employed because of user resistance. In FY18, NIST advanced
           research that examined usability attributes and reasons for user resistance.
           The topics addressed included phishing, password policies, usable privacy,
           cryptographic development, and youth password perceptions and behaviors. FY18
           marked the beginning of a multi-year research effort to examine youth security
           practices, behaviors, and perceptions with the goal of developing useful guidance
           to help youth learn, understand, and ultimately practice good cybersecurity
           behaviors. In FY18, a paper documenting the results of the first school district
           surveyed (Ohio)—which included students in grades 3 to 8—was completed.
           Further analysis of all five school systems’ survey data is being conducted in
           FY19 and will include descriptive statistics and a follow-up survey that examines
           parents’ password practices and their involvement (or lack of involvement) with
           the password usage of their grade school children.


        RESULTS OF ONLINE SURVEYS
        OF CRYPTOGRAPHIC DEVELOPERS
        During FY18, the Usability and Cybersecurity team published a paper reporting the
        results of online surveys of organizations involved in cryptographic development.
        Findings revealed that organizations used cryptography for a wide range of
        purposes. Most relied on generally accepted, standards-based implementations
        as guides while others developed their own implementations by drawing from
        non-standards resources. The results highlighted the challenges for organizations
        that undertake cryptographic development, including difficulties in recruiting
        and managing talent, disruptions to the product lifecycle, and trouble explaining
        the security value of products to customers. Interviews of representatives
        from organizations that include cryptography in their products suggested a
        strong security mindset demonstrated by robust organizational security culture
        and the deep expertise of those performing cryptographic development. The
        results encourage additional research initiatives to explore variations in those
        implementing cryptography, which can aid in transferring lessons learned from
        more security-mature organizations to the broader development community
        through educational opportunities, tools, and other mechanisms.




18


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
IMPERATIVE 6
Enhancing Identity and Access Management

Properly managing access to IT systems, processes, and information is central to managing
cybersecurity risks and a priority for NIST’s cybersecurity program. NIST engages and
collaborates with standards bodies and consortia such as the International Organization
for Standardization (ISO),46 the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),47 the Fast IDentity
Online (FIDO) Alliance,48 the Open Identity Federation (OIF), and the Kantara Initiative.49


       MOVING AWAY FROM PASSWORDS
       In response to a widely recognized need, NIST continued to advance the
       challenge of moving away from passwords and plans to publish a key report in
       2019 with its latest research findings and recommendations. In 2018, NIST:
       •   Continued to investigate Authentication for Law Enforcement Vehicle
           Systems50 project requirements and
       •   Revised high visibility publications, including: the Attribute Based Access Control
           (SP 1800-3)51 guide that shows how to manage access to networked resources
           more securely and efficiently; the Mobile Application Single Sign-on: Improving
           Authentication for Public Safety and First Responders (SP 1800-13)52 guide
           that shows how single sign-on can be used efficiently and securely on mobile
           devices to access restricted information; and the Multifactor Authentication for
           E-Commerce (SP 1800-17)53 guide that shows how organizations can efficiently
           implement multi-factor authentication in a user-friendly manner to protect
           customers’ information from being used for fraudulent purchases.
       In FY19, NIST intends to finalize SP 1800-3, SP 1800-13, and SP 1800-17 based on
       comments from industry and the public.




46
     International
     
                   Organization for Standardization (ISO), https://www.iso.org/home.html
47
     Internet
     
              Engineering Task Force (IETF), https://www.ietf.org/about/
48
     Fast
     
          IDentity Online Alliance (FIDO), https://fidoalliance.org/
49
     Kantara
     
             Initiative, https://kantarainitiative.org/
50
     Authentication
     
                    for Law Enforcement Vehicle Systems, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/project-concepts/
     authentication-law-enforcement-vehicle-systems
51
     SP
     
        1800-3, Attribute Based Access Control, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-blocks/attribute-based-
     access-control
52
     SP
     
        1800-13, Mobile Application Single Sign-On, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-cases/mobile-sso
53
     SP
     
        1800-17, Multifactor Authentication for E-Commerce, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-cases/             19
     multifactor-authentication-ecommerce


                                            NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
     IMPERATIVE 6 – Enhancing Identity and Access Management



              •   Personal Identity Verification (PIV).54 As charged by Homeland Security
                  Presidential Directive-12, NIST developed and maintains the Federal
                  Information Processing Standard (FIPS) for personal identity verification (PIV)
                  of federal employees and contractors (FIPS 201).55 In FY18, the agency revised
                  its guideline for the use of PIV credentials for physical access (SP 800-116)56
                  and sought comments on a draft report demonstrating how commercial
                  technologies can be used to issue and use PIV credentials on mobile devices.
                  NIST also requested public comments SP 1800-12,57 a guide that shows how
                  to leverage identity-proofing and vetting results of current and valid PIV
                  credentials to enable two-factor authentication to information technology
                  systems via mobile devices. In FY19, NIST plans to revise FIPS 201 to reflect
                  technology changes and evolving practices regarding authentication using
                  PIV credentials.
              •   Policy Machine – Next Generation Access Control. NIST is developing
                  an Attribute-Based Access Control (ABAC) framework called the “Policy
                  Machine,” which is designed to align with a Next Generation Access Control
                  emerging standard from the American National Standards Institute/
                  International Committee for Information Technology Standards (ANSI/
                  INCITS). In FY18, NIST updated its Policy Machine Web Services through
                  GitHub as an open-source distribution to support widespread experimentation
                  of web-based applications.
              •   Access Control and Privilege Management. NIST continued to provide
                  improved guidance for dealing with access control and privilege management
                  issues. This included publishing an Attribute-Based Access Control textbook;
                  researching a general access control mechanism for cloud computing services;
                  enhancing conformance verification for access control policies; revising SP
                  1800-958—a guide that shows how to manage disparate identity and access
                  mechanisms and systems as a comprehensive identity and access management
                  system; and developing SP 1800-1859—a guide that shows a way to detect
                  and protect against IT user accounts that have administrative or “super user”
                  privileges being misused. In FY19, NIST plans to finalize SP 1800-9 and continue
                  its work with private sector communities of interest to align its guidance and
                  capability demonstrations with the needs of industry and private citizens.


     54
          Personal
          
                   Identity Verification of Federal Employees and Contractors, https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/piv
     55
          FIPS
          
               201-2, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/fips/201/2/final
     56
          SP
          
             800-116, Rev. 1, Guidelines for the Use of PIV Credentials in Facility Access, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/
          detail/sp/800-116/rev-1/final
     57
          SP
          
              1800-12, Derived PIV Credentials Practice Guide, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/library/derived-piv-credentials-
          nist-sp-1800-12-practice-guide
     58
          SP
          
             1800-9, Access Rights Management for Financial Services Sector, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-
          cases/access-rights-management
20   59
          SP 1800-18, Privileged Account Management for Financial Services Sector, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/
          

          use-cases/privileged-account-management


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
IMPERATIVE 7
Bolstering Infrastructure Protection

NIST is focusing on three major national critical infrastructure programs where effective
cybersecurity is a vital element: the internet infrastructure, Energy Infrastructure
Cybersecurity, and cybersecurity aspects of electronic voting.
     •    Internet Infrastructure Protection (IIP). NIST works with industry to develop the
          measurement science, new standards, and standards implementation capabilities
          necessary to ensure the resilience and security of the global Internet. In FY18,
          research focused on developing measurement and modeling techniques necessary
          to understand, predict, and control the behavior of internet-scale networked
          information systems, especially foundational routing and communications
          protocols. This includes the internet’s Domain Name System (DNS), Border
          Gateway Protocol (BGP), and electronic mail and messaging infrastructures. In
          addition, NIST has been giving special attention to systemic vulnerabilities in
          core internet technologies such as those that enable distributed denial-of-service
          (DDoS) attacks on a massive scale.
          In FY18, multiple NIST publications contributed to showing how to remedy serious
          security and robustness vulnerabilities in network infrastructures. Cybersecurity
          practice guides were developed with step-by-step example solutions using
          commercially available technologies. These included SP 1800-6,60 which shows
          how to combat spear phishing by improving assurance of the correctness of email
          sources, destinations, and cryptographic protection of email, and SP 1800-14,61
          which explains how service providers can better control routing of internet traffic.
          NIST also initiated a network infrastructure project to illustrate how to better
          manage cryptographic certificates in order to reduce system outage and security
          breach risks (SP 1800-16).62 In addition to completing ongoing network security
          activities in FY19, NIST plans to collaborate with government and private industry
          on a major feasibility demonstration effort for transitioning systems and services
          from IPv4 to improved IPv6 information transfer protocols.




60
     SP
     
        1800-6, Domain Name System-Based Electronic Mail Security, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-
     blocks/secured-email
61
     SP
     
        1800-14, Protecting the Integrity of Internet Routing Practice Guide, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/
     building-blocks/secure-inter-domain-routing
62
     SP
     
        1800-16, Securing Web Transactions Practice Guide, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-blocks/tls-   21
     server-certificate-management


                                          NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
     IMPERATIVE 7 – Bolstering Infrastructure Protection




              DOMAIN NAME SYSTEM-BASED ELECTRONIC MAIL SECURITY
              NIST’s Special Publication 1800-6, Domain Name System-Based Electronic
              Mail Security, was published in January 2018. This publication documents the
              use of products that improve security and integrity for electronic mail users by
              employing the DNS-based Authentication of Named Entities (DANE) protocol
              to authenticate domain addresses (e.g., @nist.gov) for electronic mail and
              STARTTLS protocol, which provides a way to take an existing insecure connection
              and upgrade it to a secure connection using secure transmission protocols. Since
              its publication, there has been a sharp increase in the number of internet domains
              that deploy DANE (608 % from February 2018 to February 2019). Moreover, the
              Department of Homeland Security’s Binding Operational Directive 18-01 now
              provides compulsory direction to federal executive branch departments and
              agencies to employ email authentication and specifies that all internet-facing
              email servers offer the STARTTLS protocol.


              •   Energy Infrastructure Cybersecurity. Under the Energy Independence and
                  Security Act (EISA),63 NIST has a leading role in collaborating with the private
                  sector to coordinate and accelerate smart grid64 interoperability and security
                  standards. Multiple NIST laboratories are involved in this effort to advance
                  measurement science, leading to better utilization of assets, improved grid
                  reliability, and greater use of renewable energy sources in the grid. This is
                  accomplished through a combination of research, standardization, testing and
                  implementation of the NIST Smart Grid Interoperability Framework.65 In FY18, NIST:
                  •   Conducted a grid edge experiment to understand the performance impact of
                      cybersecurity capabilities on resource-constrained components of the grid;
                  •   Published SP 1800-2,66 a guide that shows how organizations can more
                      securely and effectively manage access to networked operational technology
                      (OT) devices and systems on which their operations depend; and
                  •   Revised SP 1800-7,67 Smart Grid Cybersecurity Committee, a guide that
                      explains how energy companies can capture, transmit, analyze, and store real-
                      time or near real-time data for their systems to detect, analyze, and remediate
                      anomalous conditions.


     63
          Energy
          
                 Independence and Security Act of 2007, https://www.congress.gov/bill/110th-congress/house-bill/6
     64
          SmartGrid,
          
                     https://www.smartgrid.gov/
     65
          Smart Grid Framework, https://www.nist.gov/engineering-laboratory/smart-grid/smart-grid-framework
          

     66
          SP
          
             1800-2, Identity and Access Management (IdAM), https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-cases/idam
22   67
          SP
          
              1800-7, Situational Awareness for Electric Utilities, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-cases/
          situational-awareness


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
                                                           IMPERATIVE 7 – Bolstering Infrastructure Protection



          NIST also began to incorporate cybersecurity risk management into the next
          version of the Smart Grid Interoperability Framework. In FY19, NIST will continue
          to develop the next version of the Smart Grid Interoperability Framework 2.0,
          chair the Smart Electric Power Alliance (SEPA)68 Smart Grid Cybersecurity
          Committee, support the Department of Energy’s Cyber Resilient Energy Delivery
          Consortium (CREDC) program,69 finalize SP 1800-7,70 and undertake capability
          demonstration and documentation activities for an Energy Sector Asset
          Management71 project.


       SECURITY ASPECTS OF ELECTRONIC VOTING
       The Help America Vote Act (HAVA)72 encouraged upgrading voting equipment
       across the United States and established the Election Assistance Commission
       (EAC)73 and the Technical Guidelines Development Committee (TGDC).74 NIST
       chairs the TGDC and provides technical support related to human factors,
       security, and laboratory accreditation. Most significantly, in FY18, the TGDC
       adopted a new version of the Voluntary Voting Systems Guidelines (VVSG)75 and
       principles developed by NIST and the EAC. In FY19, NIST will continue leading the
       public working groups to inform the development of voting system requirements
       and test strategies based on the principles and guidelines. Additionally, NIST will
       support the development of a Cybersecurity Framework Profile to help better
       manage cybersecurity risk in the election infrastructure.




68
     Smart
     
           Electric Power Alliance (SEPA), https://sepapower.org/
69
     Cyber Resilient Energy Delivery Consortium (CREDC), https://cred-c.org/
70
     SP
     
         1800-7, Situational Awareness for Electric Utilities, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-cases/
     situational-awareness
71
     SP 1800-23, Energy Sector Asset Management Practice Guide, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-cases/
      energy-sector/asset-management
72
     Help America Vote Act of 2002 (HAVA), https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/hava
73
     U.S. Election Assistance Commission, https://www.eac.gov/
74
      echnical Guidelines Development Committee, https://www.eac.gov/about/technical-guidelines-
     T
     development-committee/                                                                                          23
75
     Voluntary Voting System Guidelines, https://www.eac.gov/voting-equipment/voluntary-voting-system-guidelines/


                                         NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
     IMPERATIVE 8
     Securing Emerging Technologies

     Information technology is always rapidly evolving. The extraordinary growth of smart,
     connected technologies is a particularly promising and concerning arena since any
     small, connected element is a potential point of vulnerability to the local system and all
     connected systems. Recent attacks on major network providers have included sustained
     cyber-attacks launched through fringe (but connected) parts of the system. These
     have included WiFi controllers, closed circuit television (CCTV) cameras, printers, and
     baby monitors. NIST focused significant attention in FY18 on emerging network security
     topics, such as cybersecurity for the Internet of Things (IoT), low-power wide-area
     networks, public safety broadband networks, fog computing, and quantum computing.
     In FY19, more effort will shift to cybersecurity issues associated with the potential for 5G
     networks on security requirements of new use cases and new network architectures as
     well as the impact of artificial intelligence and machine learning on cyber defenses.
          •    Cybersecurity for IoT. In FY18, to help federal agencies and other organizations
               better understand and manage the cybersecurity and privacy risks associated with
               their IoT devices, NIST published NISTIR 822876 for review and comment by
               industry and the public. Also in FY18, NIST initiated an Identity and Access
               Management for Smart Home Devices77 project and a feasibility demonstration
               project mapped to NISTIR 8228 that shows how to use existing security protocols
               to reduce opportunities for malicious access to IoT devices from the internet. That
               set the stage for publishing the resulting practice guide, SP 1800-15,78 in FY19 for
               review and comment by industry and the public. The guide is being expanded to
               include improved support for small business environments, control of access to
               and by IoT devices that do not yet support the Manufacturer Usage Description
               (MUD) protocol, and access to and utilization of threat signaling capabilities. NIST
               also co-chairs the IoT Task Group of the Interagency International Cybersecurity
               Standardization Working Group (IICS WG) with the Department of Homeland
               Security (DHS). In addition, NIST is actively engaging public and private sector
               stakeholders to better understand the IoT threat landscape and challenges (see
               the draft of NISTIR 8200).79 In FY19, after considering public comments, NIST plans
               to publish final versions of those documents and continue collaborating with
               stakeholders in developing guidance for IoT security and privacy.

     76
          NISTIR 8228, Considerations for Managing Internet of Things (IoT) Cybersecurity and Privacy Risks, https://csrc.
           nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8228/final
     77
          Identity and Access Management for Smart Home Devices, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/project-
          concepts/idam-smart-home-devices
     78
          SP 1800-15, Securing Small Business and Home Internet of Things (IoT) Devices: Mitigating Network-Based
           Attacks Using Manufacturer Usage Description (MUD), https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-blocks/
          mitigating-iot-based-ddos
24   79
          NISTIR 8200, Interagency Report on Status of International Cybersecurity Standardization for the Internet of
           Things (IoT), https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/nistir/8200/archive/2018-02-14


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
                              IMPERATIVE 8 – Securing Emerging Technologies




Figure 3: IoT for the GSA Smart Building, from NISTIR 8200




                                                                              25


            NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
     IMPERATIVE 8 – Securing Emerging Technologies




            BOTNET REPORT
            A Report to the President on Enhancing the Resilience of the Internet and
            Communications Ecosystem Against Botnets and Other Automated, Distributed
            Threats,80 released on May 30, 2018, outlines government and the private sector
            actions that would reduce the threat of botnets and similar cyberattacks. It
            responds to the May 11, 2017, Executive Order on Strengthening the Cybersecurity
            of Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure.81 That order directed the
            Secretaries of Commerce and Homeland Security to lead “an open and
            transparent process to identify and promote action by appropriate stakeholders”
            with the goal of “dramatically reducing threats perpetrated by automated and
            distributed attacks (e.g., botnets).” In the course of the year-long effort launched
            by the Executive Order, the Departments determined that the opportunities and
            challenges of working toward dramatically reducing threats from automated,
            distributed attacks can be summarized in six principal themes:
            1. Automated, distributed attacks are a global problem.
            2. Effective tools exist but are not widely used.
            3. Products should be secured during all stages of the lifecycle.
            4. Awareness and education are needed.
            5. Market incentives should be more effectively aligned.
            6. Automated, distributed attacks are an ecosystem-wide challenge
            Five complementary and mutually supportive goals were identified that, if
            realized, would dramatically reduce the threat of automated, distributed attacks
            and improve the resilience and redundancy of the ecosystem:
                Goal 1: Identify a clear pathway toward an adaptable, sustainable, and secure
                technology marketplace.
                Goal 2: Promote innovation in the infrastructure for dynamic adaptation to
                evolving threats.
                Goal 3: Promote innovation at the edge of the network to prevent, detect, and
                mitigate automated, distributed attacks.
                Goal 4: Promote and support coalitions between the security, infrastructure,
                and operational technology communities domestically and around the world.
                Goal 5: Increase awareness and education across the ecosystem.


     80
           Report to the President on Enhancing the Resilience of the Internet and Communications Ecosystem
          A
          Against Botnets and Other Automated, Distributed Threats, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/white-
          paper/2018/05/30/enhancing-resilience-against-botnets--report-to-the-president/final
26   81
           xecutive Order (EO) 13800, Strengthening the Cybersecurity of Federal Networks and Critical Infrastructure,
          E
          https://csrc.nist.gov/topics/laws-and-regulations/executive-documents/eo-13800


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
                                                            IMPERATIVE 8 – Securing Emerging Technologies



     •    National Public Safety Broadband Network (NPSBN). Federal statute directs
          NIST to conduct research and development that supports the acceleration and
          advancement of a nationwide broadband network that will help police, firefighters,
          emergency medical service professionals and other public safety officials stay safe
          and do their jobs. In FY18, supported by the joint National Telecommunications
          and Information Administration (NTIA) and NIST Public Safety Communications
          Research (PSCR)82 program, NIST expanded its support to provision mobile
          application vetting tools for public safety mobile application security and
          continued its research into identity management, data and application isolation
          technologies, wearable devices, and broadband standards. In FY19, NIST will
          continue to strengthen its relationship with public safety and commercial
          telecommunications stakeholders. Work concerning mobile application vetting and
          cybersecurity will continue to evolve as NIST refines methods for evaluating tools
          as well as the test cases used in those evaluations. The PSCR program also plans
          fund grants and prize challenges to solve current problems and fill future gaps in
          public safety broadband technology.
     •    Fog Computing. New concepts and technologies are needed to manage
          a growing fleet of IoT devices to ensure minimal latency (delay) across a
          distributed and decentralized model. Fog computing is the next new technology
          that offers a distributed and federated compute model, which provides low-
          latency computational resources, elastic capabilities, and data analytics and
          management. In 2018, NIST facilitated an effort to document the fog computing
          conceptual model to help foster productive conversations among practitioners
          and researchers and to guide the advancement of technologies that support this
          model. The publication83 also introduces fog computing’s subsidiary concept, mist
          computing, and identifies these concepts in relation to cloud computing, cloudlets,
          and edge computing.




     Public Safety Communications Research Division (PSCR), https://www.nist.gov/ctl/pscr                     27
82   

83
     SP
     
        500-325, Fog Computing Conceptual Model, https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/500-325/final


                                        NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
     IMPERATIVE 8 – Securing Emerging Technologies




             Figure 4: Fog computing supporting a cloud-based ecosystem for smart end-devices




28


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
IMPERATIVE 9
Advancing Security Test and Measurement Tools

Widespread adoption and continuing support for cybersecurity requires:
       •   Testing and documentation of the effectiveness of recommended technologies
           and practices,
       •   Means for measuring the effectiveness of recommended technologies
           and practices,
       •   Monitoring and collection of information regarding asset inventories and security
           status, and
       •   Effective presentation of the results to those who have responsibility for allocating
           resources within organizations.
NIST is approaching the challenge of security status determination, monitoring, and
measurement along several avenues.
       •   Anomaly Detection. NIST is working with industry to identify and demonstrate
           automated tools for detecting security-relevant fault conditions. In FY18, a project
           was initiated to show ways to improve detection of cybersecurity attacks in
           manufacturing infrastructure environments. Preliminary project findings were
           published for public comment as NISTIR 8219.84 The anomaly detection activity will
           be expanded in FY19 to include additional detection tools.
       •   Cyber Risk Analysis (CRA) Project. This project promotes technical solutions that
           enable organizations to bridge diverse, new, and existing data sets to advance
           analysis of cyber risks. The goal is to enable information sharing among risk
           owners about historical, current, and future cyber risk conditions. NIST is
           leveraging past and present efforts such as a data repository for cyber incident
           analysis, predictive analytics and strategic analysis on threat coverage, and
           prioritization and gap identification. The near-term focus is on reconstructing the
           University of Maryland (UMD) CyberChain Portal, which is the foundational
           platform for a Cyber Incident Data and Analysis Repository (CIDAR)85 prototype.
           NIST is exploring the frameworks, formats, and standards that could help to
           automate data collection. In FY18, nearly 60 open and private cyber incident
           databases were reviewed. In FY19, data elements associated with the CIDAR
           categories will be examined for linkages that support data enrichment and bind



84
     NISTIR 8219, Securing Manufacturing Industrial Control Systems: Behavioral Anomaly Detection, https://csrc.nist.
      gov/publications/detail/nistir/8219/draft
85 
     Enhancing Resilience Through Cyber Incident Data Sharing and Analysis, https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/    29
     publications/Overcoming%20Perceived%20Obstacles%20White%20Paper_1.pdf


                                         NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
     IMPERATIVE 9 – Advancing Security Test and Measurement Tools



                  to services from NIST’s NVD and DHS’s Automated Indicator Sharing (AIS)86 tool.
                  The research effort’s output will be an initial proposed set of cyber incident data
                  points with associated metrics. A common lexicon is being explored through
                  collaboration with the Department of Defense and its DoD Cybersecurity Analysis
                  and Review (DoDCAR)87 program to incorporate the Open Security Controls
                  Assessment Language (OSCAL) to support the automation of reporting for
                  cybersecurity assessment-related information.
              •   Asset Management. One of the immediate challenges most frequently cited by
                  organizations is how they can establish and maintain complete records of their
                  hardware, software, and information assets. Without knowing what hardware
                  and software assets are in their inventories, they cannot effectively ascertain
                  and monitor the security status of systems. NIST is collaborating with industry
                  partners to promote the adoption of ISO/IEC 19770-2:2015,88 which establishes
                  a specification for representing software identification and management
                  information, and with DHS to produce guidelines for interoperable software
                  identification (SWID) tags (NISTIR 8060).89 In FY18, NIST worked with the
                  IETF to integrate SWID tags into the Network Endpoint Assessment (NEA)90
                  protocol (RFC 8412),91 helped to develop a draft software inventory message and
                  attributes (SWIMA) specification,92 and released project webpages93 to provide
                  information on tagging. In FY18, NIST also finalized a guide that shows healthcare
                  organizations how to protect electronic health records from being exploited in a
                  manner that endangers patient health or compromises identity and privacy (SP
                  1800-1).94 NIST also released a guide that shows financial service organizations a
                  way to more securely and efficiently monitor and manage their many information
                  technology hardware and software assets (SP 1800-5).95 In FY19, NIST plans to
                  continue its SWID standardization activity and begin work on a Practice Guide
                  for using cybersecurity mechanisms to protect systems from exploitation from
                  internal and external network access.



     86
          Automated
          
                    Indicator Sharing (AIS), https://www.dhs.gov/cisa/automated-indicator-sharing-ais
     87
          DoD Cybersecurity Analysis and Review, https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Projects/cyber-supply-chain-risk-
          

          management/documents/SSCA/Fall_2018/WedPM2.2-STARCAR%20SCRM%20FINAL%20508.pdf
     88
          ISO/IEC 19770-2:2015, https://www.iso.org/standard/65666.html
     89
          NISTIR 8060, Guidelines for the Creation of Interoperable Software Identification (SWID) Tags, https://csrc.nist.
           gov/publications/detail/nistir/8060/final
     90
          Network Endpoint Assessment (NEA), https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5209
     91
          Software Inventory Message and Attributes (SWIMA) for PA-TNC, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc8412
     92
          Software Inventory Message and Attributes (SWIMA), https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc8412/
     93
          Software Identification (SWID) Tagging, https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/software-identification-swid
     94
          SP 1800-1, Securing Electronic Health Records on Mobile Devices, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-cases/
           health-it/ehr-on-mobile-devices
     95
          SP 1800-5, IT Asset Management, https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-cases/financial-services-sector/it-
30         asset-management



     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
                                            IMPERATIVE 9 – Advancing Security Test and Measurement Tools



     •    Automated Combinatorial Testing. Engineers often encounter security failures that
          result from unexpected interactions between components. If all faults in a system
          can be triggered by a combination of a known number of parameters, then testing
          all possible combinations of those parameters with a practical number of tests
          can provide strong fault detection efficiency. These methods96 are being applied
          to software and hardware testing for reliability, safety, and security. NIST’s focus
          is on empirical test results and their impact on real-world problems. Advances
          for 2018 included the development of parallel processor code for measuring the
          combinatorial coverage of very large (>1,000 variables) test arrays. This tool is being
          applied by industry in evaluating the quality of their test suites for commercial
          products. In FY19, these methods will be applied to verification and testing for the
          Internet of Things in industrial control and home automation applications.
     •    Security Automation and Continuous Monitoring. IT environments are under
          constant threat of attack and are frequently undergoing change with new and
          updated software being deployed along with updated configurations. The wide
          variety of computing products, dynamic nature of software, speed of configuration
          change, and diversity of threats challenges organizations to maintain situational
          awareness over their IT assets and utilize this information to make informed risk-
          based decisions. Security automation employs standardized data formats and
          transport protocols to enable data to be exchanged between business, operational,
          and security systems that support security processes. This is done by identifying
          IT assets, providing awareness over the operational state of computing devices,
          enabling security reference data to be collected from internal and external sources,
          and supporting analysis processes that measure the effectiveness of security
          controls and provide visibility into security risks, thereby enabling risk-based
          decision making. In FY18, NIST continued to create reference data, offer guidance,
          and participate in international engagement for the development of flexible,
          open standards. These efforts will be continued in FY19 as NIST seeks to improve
          the interoperability, broad acceptance, and adoption of security automation
          solutions to address current and future security challenges. In turn, this will create
          opportunities for innovation.




96
     Automated
     
                 Combinatorial Testing for Software, https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/automated-combinatorial-testing-   31
     for-software


                                         NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2018
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
