                       Archived NIST Technical Series Publication
The attached publication has been archived (withdrawn), and is provided solely for historical purposes.
It may have been superseded by another publication (indicated below).

Archived Publication
Series/Number:            NIST Special Publication 800-11
Title:
                          The Impact of the FCC's Open Network Architecture on NS/EP
                          Telecommunications Security
Publication Date(s):      February 1995
Withdrawal Date:
Withdrawal Note:




Superseding Publication(s)
The attached publication has been superseded by the following publication(s):

Series/Number:
Title:


Author(s):


Publication Date(s):
URL/DOI:


Additional Information (if applicable)
Contact:                 Computer Security Division (Information Technology Lab)
Latest revision of the
attached publication:
Related information:
                         http://csrc.nist.gov/

Withdrawal
announcement (link):




Date updated: June 9, 2015
                                                       1




                   NIST Special Publication 800-1          The Impact of the FCC's Open
                   U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
                                                           Network Architecture on NS/NP
                   COMMERCE                                Telecommunications Security
                   Technology Administration
                   National Institute of Standards
                   and Technology                          Karen Olsen and John Tebbutt

     NAT L   INST. OF   STAND « TECH   R.I.C.




                                                 msT
AlllOM SETbTD


                                       COMPUTER                            SECURITY




U57
.800-11
95
                                                                                               '




7      he National Institute of Standards and Technology was established in 1988 by Congress to "assist industry
       in the development of technology . . . needed to improve product quality, to modernize manufacturing processes,

to ensure product reliability   .   .   .   and to facilitate rapid commercialization ... of products based on new scientific
discoveries."
       NIST, originally founded as the National Bureau of Standards in 1901, works to strengthen U.S. industry's
competitiveness; advance science and engineering; and improve public health, safety, and the environment. One of the
agency's basic functions is to develop, maintain, and retain custody of the national standards of measurement, and
provide the means and methods for comparing standards used in science, engineering, manufacturing, commerce,
industry, and education with the standards adopted or recognized by the Federal Government.
       As an agency of the U.S. Commerce Department's Technology Administration, NIST conducts basic and applied
research in the physical sciences and engineering, and develops measurement techniques, test methods, standards, and
related services.   The Institute does generic and precompetitive work on new and advanced technologies. NIST's
research facilities are located at Gaithersburg,        MD 20899, and at Boulder, CO 80303. Major technical operating units
and their principal activities are listed below. For more information contact the Public Inquiries Desk, 301-975-3058.



Office of the Director                                                 Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory
• Advanced Technology Program                                          •   Precision Engineering
•   Quality Programs                                                   •   Automated Production Technology
•   International and Academic Affairs                                 •   Intelligent Systems
                                                                       •   Manufacturing Systems Integration
Technology Services                                                    •   Fabrication Technology
•   Manufacturing Extension Partnership
•   Standards Services                                                 Electronics and Electrical Engineering
•   Technology Commercialization                                       Laboratory
•   Measurement Services                                               •   Microelectronics
•   Technology Evaluation and Assessment                               •   Law Enforcement Standards
•   Information Services                                               •   Electricity
                                                                       •   Semiconductor Electronics
Materials Science and Engineering                                      •   Electromagnetic Fields'
Laboratory                                                             •   Electromagnetic Technology'
                                                                                               '

•   Intelligent Processing of Materials                                •   Optoelectronics'
•   Ceramics
•   Materials Reliability'                                             Building and Fire Research Laboratory
•   Polymers                                                           •   Structures
•   Metallurgy                                                         •   Building Materials
•   Reactor Radiation                                                  •   Building Environment
                                                                       •   Fire Safety
Chemical Science and Technology                                        •   Fire Science
Laboratory
•   Biotechnology                                                      Computer Systems Laboratory
•   Chemical Kinetics and Thermodynamics                               •   Office of Enterprise Integration
•   Analytical Chemical Research                                       •   Information Systems Engineering
•   Process Measurements^                                              •   Systems and Software Technology
•   Surface and Microanalysis Science                                  • Computer Security
•   Thermophysics^                                                     • Systems and Network Architecture

                                                                       • Advanced Systems

Physics Laboratory
•   Electron and Optical Physics                                       Computing and Applied Mathematics
•   Atomic Physics                                                     Laboratory
•   Molecular Physics                                                  •   Applied and Computational Mathematics^
•   Radiometric Physics                                                •   Statistical   Engineering^
•   Quantum Metrology                                                  • Scientific Computing Environments^
•   Ionizing Radiation                                                 • Computer Services
•   Time and Frequency'                                                • Computer Systems and Communications^

•   Quantum Physics'                                                   •   Information Systems


'At Boulder, CO 80303.
^Some elements at Boulder, CO 80303.
NIST Special Publication 800-11   ThC IlTipaCt Of thC FCC'S OpCIl
                                  Network Architecture on NS/NP
                                  Telecommunications Security

                                  Karen Olsen and John Tebbutt




    COMPUTER                                  SECURITY
                                  Computer Systems Laboratory
                                  National Institute of Standards
                                  and Technology
                                  Gaithersburg,   MD 20899-0001



                                  February 1995




                                  U.S. Department of Commerce
                                  Ronald H. Brown, Secretary

                                  Technology Administration
                                  Mary L. Good, Under Secretary for Technology
                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                  Arati Prabhakar, Director
                         Reports on Computer Systems Technology

   The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has a unique responsibility for computer
systems technology within the Federal government. NIST's Computer Systems Laboratory (CSL) devel-
ops standards and guidelines, provides technical assistance, and conducts research for computers and
related telecommunications systems to achieve more effective utilization of Federal information technol-
ogy resources. CSL's responsibilities include development of technical, management, physical, and ad-
ministrative standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive unclassified
information processed in Federal computers. CSL assists agencies in developing security plans and in
improving computer security awareness training. This Special Publication 800 series reports CSL re-
search and guidelines to Federal agencies as well as to organizations in industry, government, and
academia.




    National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-11
        Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 800-11, 40 pages (Feb. 1995)
                                          CODEN: NSPUE2




                            U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                        WASHINGTON: 1995

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402
                                                                                                              I
Contents
Preface                                                                                      v

1   Introduction                                                                             1


2   The FCC's Open Network Architecture                                                      2

3   NS/EP Telecommunications Security Concerns                                               4
    3.1    Assets To Be Protected                                                            5
    3.2    Security Threats                                                                  5
           3.2.1   Denial of Service                                                         6
           3.2.2   Impersonating a User                                                      6
           3.2.3   Disclosure of Information                                                 7
           3.2.4   Message Stream or Data Modification                                       7
           3.2.5   Traffic analysis                                                          7
    3.3    Potential Impact on NS/EP Telecommunications                                      7
           3.3.1   Denial or Disruption of Service                                           8
           3.3.2  Unauthorized Monitoring and Disclosure of Sensitive Information   .   .    8
           3.3.3  Unauthorized Modification of Network Databases/Services                    8
           3.3.4  Fraud                                                                      8
    3.4    Sources of Security Threats                                                       9
           3.4.1  Employees /Insiders                                                        9
           3.4.2  Malicious Hackers                                                          9
           3.4.3  Natural Disasters                                                         10
           3.4.4   Foreign Adversaries                                                      10
           3.4.5   Hostile Attacks                                                          10


4   ONA NS/EP Telecommunications Security Concerns                                          12
    4.1    Network Elements                                                                 13
    4.2    Identification and Authentication of Users                                       13
    4.3    Resource Access Controls                                                         14
    4.4    Data Integrity                                                                   14
    4.5    Software Vulnerabilities                                                         14
    4.6    System Integrity                                                                 15
    4.7    Fraud                                                                            15
    4.8    Computer Intruders                                                               16
    4.9    OAM&P                                ,.                                          16
    4.10 Connectivity                                                                       17
    4.11   UnbundHng                                                                        17
    4.12 Distributed Intelligence                                                           17
    4.13 Intelligent Networks                                                               17
    4.14   ONA Services                                                                     18
    4.15 Feature Interaction                                                                18
    4.16   Enhanced Service Providers                                                       19




                                                iii
5   Conclusions                                      20

Acronyms                                             22

References                                           23

A FCC ONA Orders                                     25

B Committees of Interest to ONA                      26

C   ONA Services                                     28

D ONA Security Capabilities                          30
    D.l   Customer Proprietary Network Information   30
    D.2   Operations Support Systems                 30

E   ONA Services of Interest to NS/EP                33




                                           IV
Preface
A significant portion of National Security and Emergency Preparedness (NS/EP) telecom-
munications relies on the Public Switched Network (PSN). Therefore, NS/EP telecommu-
nications is concerned with the protection of the PSN to ensure that telecommunications
services are available and reliable. Service vendors, equipment manufacturers, and the fed-
eral government are concerned that vulnerabilities in the PSN could be exploited and result
                                     To address these threats, NIST is assisting the Office
in disruptions or degradation of service.
of the Manager, National Communications System (OMNCS), in the areas of computer and
network security research and development. NIST is investigating the vulnerabilities and
related security issues that result from use of the Federal Communications Commission's
(FCC) Open Network Architecture (ONA).
   This report provides an overview of ONA, describes NS/EP telecommunications security
concerns, and describes NS/EP telecommunications security concerns that the FCC's     ONA
requirement introduces into the PSN. Conclusions are presented in Section 5.
1       Introduction
Open Network Architecture (ONA) is a regulatory framework imposed by the Federal Com-
munication Commission (FCC) on communications carriers (the long distance telephone car-
riers such as AT&T and the Regional Bell Operating Companies (RBOCs)) which requires
the carriers to provide competing service providers with access to basic communications
services on an equal cost basis.
    Because     ONA involves access to communications networks by many external service
providers who lie outside the administrative purview of the network owners, security concerns
arise regarding such issues as authentication of the service user, control of the user's access
to network facilities, and the delimitation of the scope of access to other networks granted
to the user.
    The aim of this paper is to assess whether the FCC's ONA requirement for nondiscrimina-
tory access introduces additional security concerns into the Public Switched Network (PSN).
Assuring the availability of National Security/Emergency Preparedness (NS/EP) telecom-
munications requires protection of the PSN. The targeted audience for this report includes
general telecommunications managers and technical professionals in the telecommunications
industry. The main body of the report was written for general telecommunications managers.
Sections containing more technical information are located in the Appendix.
   This paper is broken down as follows:

    •   Section 2 provides a description of ONA, the intent behind it, and the current state of
        play;

    •   Section 3 addresses NS/EP telecommunications security concerns, outlines assets to
        be protected, and describes security threats, potential impacts on NS/EP telecommu-
        nications, and sources of threats;

    •   Section 4 describes NS/EP telecommunications security concerns raised by the FCC's
        ONA requirement;
    •   Section 5 presents a summary of NS/EP telecommunications security concerns raised
        by the FCC's ONA requirement;

    •   A list of acronyms and references are provided; and
    •   Appendices A through E contain more detailed information pertaining to ONA.




                                                1
2       The FCC's Open Network Architecture
In May, 1986, in its Third Computer Inquiry, also known as theComputer III Decision [1],
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) introduced the concept of an Open Network
Architecture (ONA), which represents an attempt to create free market conditions within
the telecommunications industry through regulation.
    ONA is a regulatory framework imposed on the Regional Bell Operating Companies
(RBOCs) and AT&T by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for the provision
of enhanced communications services. ONA requirements were imposed on GTE in early
1994.   Subsequent FCC orders have substantially reduced the applicability of unbundling
and other aspects of ONA on AT&T. Currently, AT&T is not directly subject to ONA
requirements, but is subject to Comparatively Efficient Interconnection (CEI) requirements.
    Before initial ONA plans were filed, the RBOCs and AT&T were subject to Compara-
tively Efficient Interconnection requirements. Under Comparatively Efficient Interconnection
requirements, the carrier is required to provide comparably efficient interconnection for each
enhanced service that is offered, such that any Enhanced Service Provider (ESP) can access
the elements of the basic telephone network in a manner that is completely equivalent to the
method that carrier's enhanced services access the basic network. Comparatively Efficient
Interconnection was initially used for determining interim approval of any specific enhanced
service of a carrier prior to the implementation of ONA plans. For the purposes of this paper,
the term carrier will be used to refer to those carriers subject to ONA or Comparatively
Efficient Interconnection requirements.
    Under Comparatively Efficient Interconnection, the set of basic service functions that a
carrier uses in an enhanced service offering should be available to ESPs under tariff as a
Basic Service Element (BSE) or a set of Basic Service Elements.-^ For example, if a carrier's
enhanced service utilizes digital transmission, calling number identification, and specific
signaling capabilities, then the Comparatively Efficient Interconnection for that service must
include these basic services as a set of Basic Service Elements unbundled from other basic
service offerings.
    ONA mandates that the carriers should provide independent ESPs access to basic com-
munications services on an equal basis and at an equal cost to those enjoyed by the carriers'
own Enhanced Service operations. This so-called unbundling of services forces the carriers
to relinquish their local monopolies on telecommunications services, creating an open mar-
ket,  and allowing various service providers to compete on an equal basis. The carriers are
required to satisfy all ESP requests that meet the FCC's criteria of demand, utility, technical
feasibility, and cost feasibility, regardless of whether the carrier plans to offer the enhanced

service.
   Basic services are limited to "the common carrier offering of transmission capacity for the
movement of information" [21]. Enhanced Services consist of the combination of transmission
and basic switching services with other services, such as services provided by computer
application programs, to produce additional or restructured information, and/or involve
subscriber interaction with stored information. Current examples are in the form of enhanced

   ^Note that each ONA plan describes a set of Basic Service Elements (BSEs), Basic Serving Arrangements
(BSAs), and Complementary Network Services (CNSs). These services are described in more detail in
Appendix C.


                                                   2
                                                              ^




telephone services, such as call forwarding, voice mail, caller ID, and last number redial. In
order to provide enhanced services, an ESP requires access to basic communications functions
from the common carrier. Under ON A, these basic functions are unbundled from one another
into tariffed basic building blocks known as Basic Service Elements (BSEs). ESPs are free
to purchase these basic services individually in a way that best matches their requirements
for the provision of a particular enhanced service.
    Rutkowski [2] offers the following distillation of the ONA framework sketched out by the
FCC in its Computer III Decision:

      ONA is the overall design of a carrier's basic network facilities and services to
     permit all users of the basic network, including the enhanced service operations of
     the carrier and its competitors, to interconnect to specific basic network functions
     and interfaces on an unbundled and equal access basis.

   The FCC declined to provide a specific standard for ONA [1, page 1067]. Rather, it
placed the burden for the development of Open Network Architectures on the carriers. Initial
ONA plans were filed with the FCC by February 1, 1988. ONA plans for each carrier
are continually being amended to reflect changes in services offered and to comply with
additional requirements of the FCC. Appendix A provides additional information on FCC
Orders directing the development and evolution of ONA plans.




   ^Attributed to W.H.McElveen from his talk "ONA Overview and    Forum Mission" given at the first
national ONA Forum, Herndon, VA, Oct 28 - 29, 1986


                                               3
3       NS/EP Telecommunications Security Concerns
The Public Switched Network (PSN) provides telecommunications services throughout the
United States. The PSN consists of both voice and data communication networks and pro-
vides a wide range of services to a vast number of businesses, organizations, and individuals.
National Security /Emergency Preparedness (NS/EP) telecommunications services are those
used to maintain a state of readiness or to respond to and manage any event or crisis (lo-
cal, national, or international) that causes or could cause injury or harm to the population,

damage to or loss of property, or degrades or threatens the NS/EP posture of the United
States [3]. A significant portion of NS/EP telecommunications relies on the PSN, there-
fore,   NS/EP telecommunications is concerned with the protection of the PSN to ensure that
telecommunications services are available and reliable.
    A 1989 report "Growing Vulnerability of the Public Switched Networks: Implications for
National Security Emergency Preparedness" by the National Research Council (NRC) ad-
dresses concerns that the nation's networks are becoming more vulnerable to serious network
disruptions   [4].   The report reached several conclusions and listed numerous recommenda-
tions to reduce network vulnerabilities. Several conclusions reached by the National Research
Council are listed below:

    •   The evolution of switching technology is resulting in fewer switches, a concentration of
        control, and thus greater vulnerability of the public switched networks.


    •   The public switched networks are increasingly controlled by and dependent on software
        that will increase access to executable code and databases for user configuration of
        features, a situation that creates vulnerability to   damage by "/iacA;ers,"   "-yiruses,"

         worms" and "time bombs".

    •   The power of optical fiber technology is diminishing the number of geographic trans-
        mission routes, increasing the concentration of traffic within those routes, reducing
        the use of other transmission technologies, and restricting spatial diversity. All these
        changes are resulting in an increase in network vulnerability.

    •   There is a progressive concentration of various traffic in and through single buildings
        resulting in increasing vulnerability. As a result this trend increases the potential for
        catastrophic disruption that may be caused by damage to even a single location.


    In 1990, the National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee (NSTAC) ini-
tiated the Network Security Task Force to address network security concerns.        The findings
of the Network Security Task Force are documented in the "Report of the Network Security
Task Force" [5]. Some of the conclusions of this report are highlighted below:

    •   There are software security vulnerabilities in the public switched network. Some of
        these vulnerabihties could impact NS/EP telecommunications capabilities.

    •   There is a threat to the PSN in the form of computer criminals or intruders who pen-
        etrate the various systems of the PSN. The threat to software security is international
        and in some cases penetrations originate from overseas.
     •    The current risk, which is a function of vulnerabilities and threats, is highly uncertain.
          Until there is confidence that strong, comprehensive security programs are in place, the
          industry should assume that a motivated and resourceful adversary, in one concerted
          manipulation of network software, could degrade at least portions of the PSN and
          monitor or disrupt the telecommunications serving NS/EP telecommunications users.

    As described above, reports from the National Research Council and the National Secu-
rity Telecommunications Advisory Committee ([4], [5]) indicate that because of converging
trends in technology, economics, and regulatory practice, the PSN is vulnerable to numerous
security threats. It is possible that vulnerabilities in the PSN could be exploited and result
in degradation or disruption of service.       Disruption of NS/EP telecommunications services
represents a threat to public safety and security.       The report "Electronic Intrusion Threat
to NS/EP Telecommunications" notes that hackers have the capability to launch sophisti-
cated widespread attacks on the PSN and these types of attacks could result in significant
degradation in the nation's NS/EP telecommunication capabilities, create significant public
health and safety problems, and cause serious economic shocks [19].



3.1        Assets To Be Protected
This section lists many telecommunications assets that need to be protected. Assets are also
referred to as PSN resources.      Many of the assets that need to be protected are Operations,
Administration, Maintenance and Provisioning (OAM&P) system assets.              OAM&P    is   a set of
functions used to administer /manage network elements and networks. Telecommunications
assets requiring protection include the following:


     1.   Switches;

     2.   Customer, carrier, and ESP proprietary information;

     3.   Data, especially billing data and data that enables reconfiguration;

     4.   Application System software, firmware, hardware, administrative capabilities, and sys-
          tem functions for configuration, update, and maintenance of all hardware, firmware,
          and software;

     5.   Application System interfaces;

     6.   Application System control and management databases;

     7.   Attributes and features of each Application System component or element; and

     8.   Application System audit trail.


3.2         Security Threats
A threat is an accidental or deliberate action, event, or condition with the potential to com-
promise the quality, utility, or functionality of network services and operations. A threat is



                                                   5
the result of the exploitation of a vulnerability. For example, if a system is vulnerable be-
cause a default password is used, then it is a potential threat that an unauthorized user could
exploit the vulnerability of the default password and impersonate another user. This section
will focus on the most significant threats that result from the exploitation of vulnerabilities.
   Threats that pose a risk to the PSN are of concern to NS/EP telecommunications because,
especially when combined, they could impair the ability of the PSN to provide the full range
of services required to meet NS/EP telecommunications services.



3.2.1     Denial of Service

The threat of denial of service involves actions that prevent a network element from function-
ing in accordance with its intended purpose. Network Elements may be rendered partially or
entirely unusable for legitimate users. Denial of service may cause operations which depend
on timeliness to be delayed. Examples of denial of service include:

   •    Unauthorized modification of existing network element resources (e.g. hardware, soft-
        ware, and databases) which affects the availability of the resource; and

   •    The degradation of network element service caused by a large volume of service re-
        quests.


3.2.2     Impersonating a User

The threat of impersonating a user, also known as masquerade, is an attempt to gain unau-
thorized access or greater privilege to a system, by posing as an authorized user. Examples
of masquerade are using stolen logon ids and passwords, bypassing the authentication mech-
anism, and using security holes in programs. An example of a vulnerability that is likely to
lead to masquerade is the use of weak authentication methods. Impacts on the PSN caused
by threat of impersonating a user include the full range of impacts to NS/EP telecommu-
nications described in section 3.3. Examples of potential impacts on the PSN include the
deletion, disclosure, or modification of system software and data,    and the deletion, disclo-
sure, or modification of data that enables changes in routing information or reconfiguration
of the network.    An example of modification of system software is the re-programming of
network element software to insert malicious code to steal passwords.
   The threat of masquerade can occur from:

   •    Locally connected users;

   •    Outside users accessing network elements from the public network;

   •    Compromised administrator accounts that are configured for direct and remote access;
        and

   •    Use of dial-in modems;




                                               6
3.2.3     Disclosure of Information

The threat of disclosure of information involves the unauthorized disclosure of data or infor-
mation regarding network elements, either by deliberate action or by accident. Examples of
disclosure of information include:


   •    Eavesdropping on phone conversations or on data transmission which could result in
        the disclosure of sensitive information such as passwords, data, and procedures for
        performing functions; and

   •    Unauthorized disclosure of routing or address information.


3.2.4     Message Stream or Data Modification
Message stream or data modification involves the deletion or modification of data. The
deletion or modification of data may affect network element software or databases or it
could affect network elements. Examples include:


   •    Unauthorized modification of billing information;

   •    Unauthorized modification of network element software or databases; and

   •    Unauthorized reconfiguration of network elements.


3.2.5     Traffic analysis

Traffic analysis is a form of passive attack in which an intruder observes data being trans-
mitted and makes inferences from the calling and called numbers, and the frequency and
length of the calls. Examples include:


   •    A corporate merger is deduced from the amount of traffic between two companies.

3.3      Potential Impact on NS/EP Telecommunications
As described in the previous section, there are many threats that can impair the ability of
the PSN to provide the full range of services required to meet NS/EP telecommunication
services. Threats can be categorized according to the following effects on assets of the PSN:


   •    Availability

   •    Privacy

   •    Integrity

   •    Fraud

   The following sections describe the potential impact on NS/EP for each of the categories.




                                               7
3.3.1     Denial or Disruption of Service

Denial or disruption of service attacks affect the availability of data, services, and network
elements. In the past, computer intruders have crashed or disrupted signal transfer points,
                and OAM&P systems, reportedly planted destructive "time bomb" pro-
traffic switches,

grams designed to shut down major switching hubs, and disrupted E911 services throughout
the eastern seaboard [19]. For the most part, service disruptions caused by computer in-
truders have been brought about by accidental actions. Unintentional disruptions caused by
computer intruders are much more common than malicious disruptions.
   The "Report of the Network Security Task Force" presents the following conclusion [5]:

        A motivated and resourceful adversary, in one concerted manipulation of network
        software, could degrade at least portions of the PSN and monitor or disrupt the
        telecommunications serving NS/EP users.


3.3.2     Unauthorized Monitoring and Disclosure of Sensitive Information

This threat category covers all threats which involve the deliberate or accidental disclosure of
sensitive information.The privacy of information is affected because information is exposed
without authorization. The term sensitive not only refers to highly classified government
information or proprietary information, but to all private data. Approaches used by intrud-
ers to capture     data include electronic eavesdropping, use of network monitoring tools, and
electronic intrusion on network elements.


3.3.3     Unauthorized Modification of Network Databases/Services

This threat category covers all threats which involve the deliberate or accidental modification
of network databases and services. Threats in this category affect the integrity of data
because data may have been corrupted. The integrity of network services is affected because
the service may not function in accordance with its intended purpose.
    The "Electronic Intrusion Threat to NS/EP Telecommunications" report notes the fol-
lowing about unauthorized modification of network databases/services [19]:

        Computer intruders have demonstrated a high level of technical skill in modifying
        PSN databases and subscriber services. They have added unauthorized accounts
        to service control points, service provisioning systems, digital cross-connect sys-
        tems, and other network elements. They have added and modified user services,
        forwarded calls, modified service classes on circuits, and turned off billing on spe-
        cific circuits.   On data networks, computer intruders have changed the routing
        tables and service descriptions for specific users.   This level of penetration and
        skill   demonstrates that computer intruders could seriously compromise NS/EP
        telecommunications.


3.3.4     Fraud
In the past, computer intruders have been motivated by intellectual curiosity and a desire
to understand the PSN. Today, computer intruders are discovering that they can sell their


                                                  8
services and are motivated by greed.       The report "The Electronic Intrusion Threat to NS /EP
Telecommunications" notes the following about fraud and financial loss [19]:

        Toll fraud   is   a multibillion-dollar-per-year business in the United States.   Nor-
        mally, the toll fraud threat is not seen as being related directly to the performance
        of Government agencies' ability to perform NS/EP missions.        Because of the na-
        ture of this threat, toll fraud should be considered a significant problem, but one
        with undefined NS/EP implications [19].


3.4      Sources of Security Threats
Several reports, for example the National Research Council and National Security Telecom-
munications Advisory Council reports described earlier in this section ([4], [5]), have high-
lighted potential threats to the PSN. Primary sources of threats are employees/insiders, ma-
licious hackers, natural disasters, foreign adversaries, and hostile attacks.      In several cases,
the areas for sources of threats may overlap. For example, hostile attacks may be performed
by foreign adversaries or a disgruntled employee.


3.4.1     Employees/Insiders

Intentional and accidental errors and malicious acts by employees and insiders cause a con-
siderable amount of the damages and losses experienced in the telecommunications industry.
The range of employees spans from good intentioned employees that make accidental errors
to disgruntled employees seeking revenge. Insiders, such as contractors who have administra-
tive roles with respect to network service, that have a high level of knowledge and privileges
pose a threat. The full range of employees and insiders increases the potential for acts that
can severely impact the security of the PSN.


3.4.2     Malicious Hackers

As a result of their increasing knowledge and sophistication, hackers have the capability to
affect NS/EP telecommunications services. Hackers have the capability to launch sophisti-
cated widespread attacks on the PSN and these types of attacks could result in significant
degradation in the nation's NS/EP telecommunication capabilities, create significant public
health and safety problems, and cause serious economic shocks           [19].   Hackers can cause a
wide range of impacts on the PSN. Hackers can affect the availability of PSN components,
and the integrity and privacy of all data and information. Fraud may also result.
   The report "Electronic Intrusion Threat to NS/EP Telecommunications" identifies and
analyzes the threat that electronic intrusion represents to the PSN and the resulting impact
upon NS/EP telecommunications. The "Electronic Intrusion Threat to NS/EP Telecommu-
nications" report notes that significant computer intruder threats arise from the following
four categories: members of the computer underground, telecommunication industry insid-
ers, industrial espionage operations, and foreign organizations. Computer intruders that are

members of the four categories listed above tend to have similar motives and techniques.
    For the remainder of this report, the term computer intruder will be used to mean those
with hostile intent. Computer intruders perhaps represent the most potent source of threat


                                                    9
because computer intruders have the capabiHties to cause the full range of threats described in
section 3.2 as well as all of the impacts to NS/EP telecommunications described in section 3.3.


3.4.3        Natural Disasters

Natural disasters can impact the availability of the PSN. The primary impact of disas-
ters such as hurricanes, floods, fires, earthquakes, tornados, and wind storms on the PSN
is   disruption and denial of service.Such disasters impact the timeliness and quality of
the delivered services. The report "Natural and Technological Disaster Threats to NS/EP
Telecommunications" provides a description of natural disaster threats and the probability
of their occurrence [17].


3.4.4        Foreign Adversaries

The world's telecommunication networks reach beyond national boundaries and computer
intruder activities have occurred internationally as well as throughout the United States. The
number of attempted intrusions through international gateways from abroad is increasing
and at least 20 foreign governments in Asia, Europe, the Middle East and Latin America
have carried out economic intelligence gathering [6].
   There have been few indications that computer undergrounds within foreign countries
carry overt political agendas.
     The report "Electronic Intrusion Threat to NS/EP Telecommunications" indicates that
individual computer intruders probably would not launch orchestrated attacks on NS/EP
systems and open source literature provides little significant evidence that foreign intelligence
services have directly targeted, penetrated, or compromised the PSN in the United States

[19].However, there have been several cases of foreign computer intruders targeting systems
in the United States and there is a large amount of circumstantial evidence and speculation
regarding foreign adversaries, such as Libya, Iraq, and Iran, targeting networks in the United
States [19].


3.4.5        Hostile Attacks

Through hostile attacks, it is possible to affect the availability of the PSN. The primary im-
pact of hostile attacks such as coordinated nuclear attacks, limited/uncoordinated nuclear
attacks, nuclear accidents, terrorism, electronic warfare, sabotage, and civil disorder on the
PSN is disruption and denial of service. Such disasters impact the timeliness and quality of
the dehvered services.   The report "Summary of the Threat to National Security and Emer-
gency Preparedness Telecommunications" relies on classified source material and focuses on
the hostile threat to NS/EP telecommunications [18].
    It is possible for sabotage to be performed by disgruntled employees and members of

adversary nations. Although the probabihty of sabotage is relatively low, the effect on NS/EP
is      The concentration of telecommunications resources increases the effects of strategic
     high.
sabotage attacks because more telecommunication resources will be affected. The use of
optical fiber increases the effects of strategic sabotage attacks because optical fiber technology
is diminishing the number of geographic transmission routes, increasing the concentration of




                                               10
traffic within those routes, reducing the use
                                                of other transmission technologies and restricting

spatial diversity.




                                                    11
4       ONA NS/EP Telecommunications Security Con-
        cerns
ONA requires the carriers to provide competing service providers with access to basic com-
munications services on an equal basis. Before ONA requirements, there were few telecom-
munication providers and the systems they used were built on proprietary platforms. ONA
involves a shift from the closed telecommunications networks of the past to open telecom-
munications networks.        In the past, telecommunications systems
                                                                   and facilities were under
the exclusive control of the carriers.      With ONA, the opening of the telephone network
to vendors  and customers of enhanced services involves significantly broadening access to
telecommunications systems and facilities. In addition, varying levels of access are allowed
to the telecommunications systems and facilities.
    A Network Operations Forum (NOF) report notes that:
        While the advent of open systems interfaces has assisted the acceptance and
        international deployment of networking technology, it has also seen a downside
        in that it has become easier to intrude on networks designed with such open
        features.   [7].


    The communications protocols used between service elements and the majority of the
services that were to become Basic Service Elements were already in existence prior to
the ONA mandate. Some of the Basic Service Element offerings related to basic transport
and signaling capabilities could be performed within the existing network without significant
development work. Other Basic Service Element offerings, such as ISDN and OAM&P access,
require modification of the existing network. Most enhanced service vendor and customer
access to network signaling and information systems require additional protections to ensure
security and the reliability and integrity of the network.
    The National Research Council notes that ONA can increase network vulnerability in
two ways:

        First,   ONA increases greatly the number of users who have access to network
        software. In any given universe of users,        some will be hostile. By giving more
        users access to network software,   ONA will open the network to additional hostile
        users.   Second, as more levels of network software are made visible to users for
        purposes of affording parity of network access, users will learn more about the
        inner workings of the network software, and those with hostile intent will learn
        more about how to misuse the network [4].

      The National Institute of Standards and Technology's "Security in Open Systems" report
[8]   notes the following:

        Greater network access is changing the telecommunications industry to one where
        many third party service providers are building products that must work with
        products from other companies       [10],   [11],   [12].   This new telecommunications
        environment has been characterized as one with: a large number of features;
        multi-media, multi-party services; partial knowledge of the feature set by service


                                                    12
                               and knowledge levels of some service creators; multiple
          designers; lower skill
          execution environments from different vendors; and distributed intelligence [15].

   The FCC's ONA requirement for nondiscriminatory access introduces vulnerabilities into
the PSN and these vulnerabilities pose a threat to NS/EP. The remainder of this section will
provide a description of potential vulnerabilities introduced by the FCC's ONA requirement.


4.1        Network Elements
As a result of the open nature of ONA, network elements are potentially vulnerable to
abuse. Network elements are analog and digital devices and supporting equipment that
provide communication services such as switching, multiplexing, and transport services to
subscribers.
   All network element interfaces and ports that accept user command inputs are potentially
vulnerable to unauthorized access. Security features, such as authentication, access control,
audit, integrity, and administration, are necessary to protect network elements from various
types of attacks leading to misuse and abuse of the software functions within a network
element.        If   security features are not properly conceived, designed, implemented, tested,
installed, documented and maintained, vulnerabilities are likely to result.



4.2        Identification and Authentication of Users
Identification is the processwhereby a network element recognizes a valid user's identity.
Authentication is the process of verifying the claimed identity of a user. A user may be a
person, a process, or a system (e.g., an operations system or another network element) that
accesses a network element to perform tasks or process a call. A user identification code is a
non-confidential auditable representation of a user. Information used to verify the claimed
identity of a user can be based on a password. Personal Identification Number (PIN), smart
card, biometrics, token, exchange of keys, etc. Authentication information should be kept
confidential.
   If users      are not properly identified then the network element is potentially vulnerable to
access by unauthorized users. Because of the open nature of ONA,           ONA greatly increases
the potential for unauthorized access. If strong identification and authorization mechanisms
are used, then the risk that unauthorized users will gain access to a system is significantly
decreased.
   Section 3.2.2 describes the threat of impersonating a user in more detail.
   The exploitation of the following vulnerabilities, as well as other identification and au-
thentication vulnerabilities, will result in the threat of impersonating a user.

      •   Weak authentication methods are used;

      •   The potential exists for users to bypass the authentication mechanism;

      •   The confidentiality and integrity of stored authentication information is not preserved,
          and

      •   Authentication information which is transmitted over the network is not encrypted.


                                                    13
       Computer intruders have been known to compromise PSN assets by gaining unauthorized
access to network elements.       It is   possible for a person impersonating an authorized user to
cause the full range of threats described in section 3.2. Impacts on the PSN caused by the
threat of impersonating a user include the full range of impacts to NS/EP telecommunica-
tions described in section 3.3.      The severity of the threat of impersonating a user depends
on the level of privilege that is granted to the unauthorized user.


4.3       Resource Access Controls
In addition to greatly increasing the number of users who have access to telecommunications
systems and facilities, ONA increases the levels of access to telecommunications systems and
facilities.   If   a network element does not provide a level of granularity such that for each
user allowed access to a resource it         is   possible to grant access rights to specific software,
processes, databases, information, etc., then users authorized to use a network element may
be able to uses resources for which they are not authorized. For example, if proper resource
access control is not used then it is possible for a user authorized to use a network element to
execute unauthorized commands, access unauthorized information, or access unauthorized
network elements.
    The exploitation of vulnerabilities associated with resource access control results in the
threat of impersonating a user. The severity of the threat of impersonating a user depends
on the level of privilege that is granted to the unauthorized user. Strong access control
mechanisms must be combined with strong identification and authentication mechanisms to
fully protect resources.



4.4       Data Integrity
The opening of the telephone network to vendors and customers of enhanced services in-
volves the broadening of access to stored data/information. For example, information which
previously was only accessible by the carrier may be accessible to vendors and customers
of enhanced services. If data is not adequately protected, perhaps by use of passwords and
partitioning, then the data is vulnerable and the integrity and privacy of the data may be
compromised.


4.5        Software Vulnerabilities
Services supported by       ONA networks require much more software than the traditional Plain
Ordinary Telephone Services [10]. As an increasing number of network services are created
and deployed, software will be an even more dominant component of telecommunications
networks.     ONA not only increases the amount of software used, ONA also greatly increases
the number of users who have access to network software.               By giving more users access to
network software, ONA increases the potential for hostile users.
       ONA also increases the number of levels of access to software. Software which previously
was only accessible by the carrier may be accessible in varying degrees to vendors and
customers of enhanced services. For example, ONA will require that access to existing switch
call   processing software be provided at an elemental service level [10].          If   proper security
mechanisms are not used, the increasing accessibihty of network software will provide hackers
and saboteurs with the opportunities to impact the PSN. For example, the accessibility of
network software may provide hackers and saboteurs with the opportunity to damage routing
databases.
   As noted in a study by the National Research Council, as more levels of network software
are made visible to users for purposes of affording parity of network access, users will learn
more about the inner workings of the network software, and those with hostile intent will
learn more about how to abuse the network [4].
    Vulnerabilities associated with software have an impact on the integrity and privacy of
the software. As computer intruders learn more about how the network software is used, it is
possible for computer intruders to have an impact on the availability, integrity, and privacy
of network functions.    Fraud may also result.


4.6     System Integrity
System integrit}'- involves ensuring the integrity of network element systems and providing an
acceptable level of service. Exploitation of vulnerabilities associated with system integrity
may result in service denial or disruption, or the unauthorized modification of user or network
information and network services.
    The unbundling of services increases the real-time processing requirements and therefore
services provided as a result of ONA requirements will require more real-time processing [10].
The paper "ONA: Demands on Provisioning and Performance" notes that the evolution of
the public network to support enhanced services creates the need for planning the growth
of real-time switch capacity in concert with the emergence of these new services. If carriers
do not adequately plan for increased real-time switch capacity, the PSN is vulnerable to
disruption and denial of service problems.



4.7     Fraud
The "Electronic Intrusion Threat to NS/EP Telecommunications" report states that because
toll fraud is   not seen as being directly related to the performance of Government agencies'
ability to   perform NS/EP missions, toll fraud is considered a significant problem, but one
with undefined NS/EP implications.
   The telecommunications networks resulting from ONA requirements are more vulnera-
ble to fraud  than networks existing before ONA requirements. If assets (e.g., application
system services, network software, and switches) are not adequately protected, then many
vulnerabilities exist. Exploitation of these vulnerabilities can result in fraud and financial
loss. ONA implementations provide a large number and range of services. It is possible for

computer intruders motivated by greed to exploit vulnerabilities in the PSN for financial
gain by selling and using services that are not paid for. As a result of ONA, the services
available to the general public represent a market in excess of $10B in 1988, growing to $30B
in 1995 [10].
   As computer intruders learn more about the inner workings of network software, and
are able to use more and more services without charge, disruption or denial of service for
authorized users, and integrity and privacy problems as well as fraud may result.


                                                  15
4.8     Computer Intruders
Section 3.4.2 described malicious hackers as a source of threat. As a result of their increasing
knowledge and sophistication, malicious hackers have the capability to exploit the vulnera-
bihties associated with the use of ONA. Malicious hackers pose a significant threat to the
PSN because of the wide extent of damage they can cause.

4.9     OAM&P
An important ONA consideration is the impact on Operations, Administration, Maintenance
and Provisioning (OAM&P) systems and procedures. OAM&P includes functions required
to provision, maintain and administer the telecommunications network, including both the
local exchange networks and the interconnected networks of end-users and ESPs.
    ESPs have requested access to BOG OAM&P functions. While many OAM&P functions
are not part of the basic network, many are important to an enhanced service offering.
Several of the FCC's ONA Orders have addressed access to Operations Support Systems
(OSS) systems (see appendix D.2). An OSS is a system (hardware and software) that
performs   OAM&P functions in concert with telecommunications personnel.
   Information available to the ESP must be comprehensive and identical to information
available to the carrier's personnel.   ESPs have requested comprehensive real-time control
over all facets of services purchased from a carrier.   An ESP must be able to use the carrier's
network elements while appearing to its own customer as though it owns these network
elements. In providing ESP access to OAM&P systems, safeguards must be maintained by
the carriers to prevent inadvertent errors, or harm to the network and OAM&P databases
by the accessing party [12]. Strong security mechanisms are needed to restrict access to
OAM&P systems. Security restrictions for system functions and partitioning of systems
and data bases are needed to provide for security and privacy of the network and ESP and
end-user information.
   An additional security consideration regarding the protection of OAM&P resources is
securing the interface between the ESP and the OSS. As long as the carrier's enhanced
services operations take the same access to OSS services as the access provided by the carrier
to ESPs, the OSS services may be accessed either directly or indirectly. If an ESP is allowed
direct access to the same data communications network that the carrier's telecommunications
use, then additional potential vulnerabilities exist. Security concerns include securing access
to the data communications network and the associated attached systems.
    Implementation of new network functionalities will impact OAM&P systems and pro-
cesses in a number of ways. The most evident is the aggregate impact on capacity, due to
the increasing number of users and items to process through the system. As a result the
threat of denial of service exists. Less evident is the impact on OAM&P systems and pro-
cesses due to the increasing scope and complexity of requests. Billing of end-user services to
ESPs, bulk resale, agency agreements, automated ordering by the ESP and the unbundling
and repackaging of new and existing technologies and services are opportunities for improved
end-user telecommunications value through "customization" of services [13].




                                                16
4.10     Connectivity
PSN security depends largely on individual service providers. By connecting to a network
owned by another carrier, vulnerabilities may be introduced. Weakness in one carrier's
networks will insert vulnerabilities into another carrier's networks if the networks are in-
terconnected. Section 4.16 describes vulnerabilities associated with ESPs connecting to the
PSN.


4.11     Unbundling
Further unbundling remains a long-term objective of ONA. The FCC's Phase I Order re-
quired unbundling "to the extent technologically feasible" [25, para.         216].   The IILC was
               BOG ONA Order, to address the potential technical and operational prob-
directed, in the
lems posed by more extensive unbundling of the network [22, pages 41-43]. The BOG ONA
Amendment Order required each carrier to amend its plan to describe any change to its plans
for developing and implementing new technologies such as SS7, ISDN, and IN technologies,
including a description of (1) how it will unbundle the services provided through the use of
such technologies and generally how those services will fit into the ONA framework; (2) ONA
services that these technologies could support;         and (3) its plans for offering such services
[24].With further unbundling of the network, many security concerns will arise.
    IILG Issue 026 is titled Long Term Unbundling and Network Evolution. "This issue
addresses the FGG directive to examine, through the IILG, the technical, operational and
administrative issues associated with further unbundling and modular architecture.            Since
the February IILG meeting the task group has finalized and validated the identified physical
points of interconnection, has developed a matrix of logical interconnection options, and is
currently seeking validation of these logical interpretations" [28] This issue considered Issue
022 unbundling criteria, has resulted in several Unbundling Forums, and has been a topic
of discussion since 1991.     It is   important that security concerns be taken into account for
planning further unbundHng of the network.


4.12     Distributed Intelligence
In the past, intelHgence, such as features and call processing software, was located primarily
at local central office switches.      Today, new enhanced services being considered are likely
to need network capabilities that are not necessarily located at local central office switches.
The trend is evolving to provide additional intelhgence in the Gustomer Premises Equipment
(GPE) and various Network Elements [10] [20]. As Intelligent Network concepts are merged
into networks based on ONA requirements, the number of services requiring distributed
intelligence will increase.
    The distribution of intelhgence will require more resources to maintain functions. Services
requiring distributed intelligence are hkely to introduce vulnerabihties.


4.13      Intelligent Networks
The paper "Access Gontrols for Open Architecture in Intelligent Networks" [16] provides the
following description of Intelhgent Networks (IN).


                                                   17
       An Intelligent Network (IN) is a switched network whose service control is re-
       moved from the individual switches and whose service definition can be pro-
       grammable. It aims at rapid and economical service provisioning and facilitates
       customer control of network services.

IN comes from the industry and ON A comes from the regulators. For the most part, IN and
ON A have been investigated separately [16].
    The opening of Intelhgent Networks introduces significant security and integrity problems
[16]. The report "The Impact of Intelligent Networks (IN) on NS/EP Telecommunications"

presents an assessment of vulnerabilities and interoperability issues associated with IN tech-
nology    [14].   The software-dependency of the Intelligent Network and the openness of its
architecture brings expanded security concerns to the Government and Industry [14].
   The IN concept allows ESPs to program their own enhanced services and IN will provide
customized software-controlled network services that can be flexibly, rapidly, and cost effec-
tively configured by the customer in response to unique requirements independent of service
provider activities [14]. As Intelligent Network concepts are merged into networks based on
ONA requirements, many vulnerabilities will result.

4.14       ONA Services
In addition to the more than 180  ONA services [9], ESPs continue to articulate their needs
for new or expanded services to the carriers in various ONA forums.
    As the result of ONA requirements, a wide range of services, including basic voice service,
data services, and enhanced voice storage and retrieval services are available today. The cur-
rent telecommunications environment has been characterized as one with: a large number of
features; multi-media, multi-party services; partial knowledge of the feature set       by service
designers; lower skill and knowledge levels of some service creators; multiple execution envi-
ronments from different vendors; and distributed intelligence [15]. As the number of ONA
services increases along with the complexity of these services, the potential for vulnerabilities
associated with     ONA services also increases.
   Section C provides a general description of          ONA services. Section E describes specific
ONA services that have a more direct impact on NS/EP.

4.15        Feature Interaction
Initialstandardization efforts involved in the provision of the        ONA plans by the carriers
related primarily to the nature of the services offered, and not to the interactions between the
different services or the nature of such interactions. This is because, in the large majority of
cases, the services that were to become the Basic Service Elements were already in existence
prior to theONA mandate, and as such so were the communications protocols used between
the service elements. The ONA mandate does not address how Basic Service Elements
should interact, merely that they should be available on an individual basis to the ESPs and
be nondiscriminatory.
    Greater network access is changing the telecommunications industry to one where many
third party service providers are building products that must work with products from other



                                                   18
companies [11],    [12], [10].   ONA increases the potential for vulnerabilities associated with
feature interaction problems.      As more services are added to the network, the potential for
undesirable feature interactions will increase.        Feature interaction could disrupt a needed
service or be targeted for intentional abuse by computer intruders.



4.16     Enhanced Service Providers
As each ESP connects to the PSN, weakness associated with the ESP's telecommunications
networks and services will insert vulnerabilities into the PSN. Delimitation of the scope of
access to the PSN is necessary to prevent ESP employees from gaining unauthorized access
to PSN services.
    Each carrier must provide a method for ESPs to access telecommunications systems and
facilities. It is a concern to what degree a carrier will investigate the credentials of an ESP,

as well as the degree of security provided by the ESP, before allowing the ESP access to
the PSN. It is possible for malicious hackers to take on the appearance of an ESP to obtain
access to the PSN.




                                                  19
5       Conclusions
The goal of the FCC's ONA is to create free market conditions within the telecommunications
industry. ONA requires carriers to provide competing ESPs with access to basic communica-
tions services on an equal cost basis and in a nondiscriminatory manner. Telecommunications
services are unbundled into services that are tariffed and may be purchased individually by
enhanced service providers. The essense of the ONA plan created by each carrier is to
describe which Basic Service Elements are Offered.^
    In the Computer III Decision, the FCC noted that ONA was a long-term evolving process.
The FCC was primarily concerned with providing unbundled services on an equal access
basis and left the implementation details fundamental to providing those services up to
the independent carriers. Security was not a driver for ONA and for the most part, the
FCC has relied on the carriers to ensure that the services provided are secure. The FCC's
requirements for security capabilities have resulted primarily from the requirement that ONA
services be provided in a nondiscriminatory manner. For example, the FCC's requirement
for the protection of Customer Proprietary Network Information was made to prevent the
carriers, who had access to customer proprietary network information for subscribers of the
carriers' basic network services, from having an unfair marketing advantage for enhanced
services.
    The exploitation of vulnerabilities introduced by the FCC's ONA can impact the avail-
ability of    PSN resources and services, the integrity of data/information, the disclosure of
data/information and the fraudulent use of services.
    ONA creates network vulnerabilities because it greatly increases the number of users
(some of whom will be hostile) who have awareness of the network architecture. In addition to
broadening access to telecommunications systems and facilities, ONA increases the levels of
access to telecommunications systems and facilities. As users learn more about the operation
of network software, those with hostile intent will acquire knowledge that could assist them
in abusing resources.
    The following list summarizes the most significant vulnerabihties that ONA introduces
into the PSN. Note that many of the vulnerabilities listed below existed prior to the FCC's
ONA requirements. However, because of the open nature of ONA, these vulnerabilities are
significantly increased.


    •   By giving more users access to the network, ONA increases the potential for unautho-
        rized access of network elements if strong access mechanisms aren't used.

    •   If   strong resource access control mechanisms aren't used, by increasing the level of
        access to network resources,    ONA increases the potential for users authorized to use
        a network element to obtain access to resources other than those that are needed to
        perform the job function

    •   The opening of the network results in the broadening of access to stored data/information.
        If data is   not adequately protected, then the data is vulnerable and the integrity and

   ^Note that each ONA plan actually describes a set of Basic Service Elements (BSEs), Basic Serving
Arrangements (BSAs), and Complementary Network Services (CNSs). These services are described in more
detail in Appendix C



                                                 20
privacy of the data may be compromised.

Services supported by  ONA networks will require more software than the traditional
Plain Ordinary Telephone Services. New software may contain bugs. ONA not only
increases the amount of software used, ONA also greatly increases the number of users
who have access to network software, and the number of levels of access to the software.
By giving more users access to network software, ONA increases the potential for hostile
users.


ONA increases vulnerabilities associated with system integrity. For example, if carriers
do not adequately plan for the increased real-time switch capacity associated with the
unbundling of services, the integrity of network element systems will be affected.

ONA involves the provisioning of billable services, and thus ONA increases the poten-
tial for fraud   and/or financial loss.

Malicious hackers have the capability to exploit the vulnerabilities associated with
ONA.

Services requiring distributed intelligence are likely to introduce vulnerabilities.

As Intelligent Network concepts are merged into networks based on ONA requirements,
many vulnerabilities will result.

As the number of new services increases and the complexity of new services increases,
the potential for vulnerabilities associated with new services increases.

ONA increases the potential for vulnerabilities associated with feature interaction prob-
lems.

Weakness in one carrier's networks will potentially insert vulnerabilities into another
carrier's networks if the networks are interconnected.


As an ESP connects to the PSN, weakness associated with the ESP's telecommunica-
tions networks and services will insert vulnerabilities into the PSN.


Depending on the degree that a carrier investigates the credentials of an ESP, as well
as the degree of security provided by the ESP, before allowing the ESP access to the
PSN, ONA increases the potential for unauthorized access.

Each ONA implementation may have its own vulnerabihties.

OAM&P systems and services may introduce new vulnerabilities.
The implementation of new technologies and further unbundling will result in new
NS/EP telecommunications security concerns.




                                          21
Acronyms
ATTC;
r\ -L lO   riiiiaiicc lor iciccoiniTiunicaLioiis iiiQuSLry                                                         ooiutions
BOC
xj vy \j

Rc; A      jjasic ociving /\rrangcnicn.L
JJij J-J   ijasic ocrvicc xL/ierneni
PTPT       Comparatively Efficient Interconnection
           Carrier Liaison Committee
P"MQ       Complementary Network Services
                  ub Loiiici            1      r opric id,r y in c l                      w or iv iiiiQrina.uion
FPC! A     H/Xcnange v^arriers oianaaras dissociation
           n/iiiicxiiCca                   ociVice r^roviaers
r v^v^     Ho/Hot*^!            1    ^TY^               1 1      i   ^ ?i t i /^n c   1         yy^ 1 c 0 1 /"vn


TTT.n      llliCJI llicLLlUIl lIiU.U.o Li y ijlcLloOIl V^OIIlIIil L LCG

IN
T9DN
NCS        v^7\ f    ion 3      1   (   »riTn td nnip^^fionQ                              S v^f
NOF        X ^ \^ 1/ V V \_/ X XV   \_<r       \^ X Ut V X w' X X D        J.   X LX XXX


NRC        X Cl> U X
             '1       W
           l^fitioririi
                     XX U>X         Rp^prirrVi
                                    X Cn_<0 ^ CXX ^XX \^ \J LXXX         dminnlX      X



NS/EP      N
           X ^ CL  1  on
               P 1uXV-^XX f\ 1
                          CL-X      Spm n t.v / rjmprcrp'n
                                           V.^ Vf   LI X X U y rv XPrpDr^ rpn n
                                                  XXXV^X E~^XX\^     /          P9 09
                                                                              xxv^o         Y      X    k/ CLX


NSTAC      National Security Telecommunications Advisory Committee
NSTF       Nptworlc Sprnntv Ta'^K rnrrf
OAM&P      Operations, Administration, Maintenance and Provisioning
OMNCS      Office of the Manager, National Communications System
ONA        Open Network Architecture
OSS        Operations Support Systems
PSN        Public Switched Network
RBOC       Regional Bell Operating Company
SS7        Signaling System 7




                                                                                                       22
References
 [1]   Federal Communications Commission. Third Computer Inquiry. FCC, June 16, 1986.

 [2]   A.M. Rutkowski. "Open Network Architectures: An Introduction," Telecommunica-
       tions, January 1987, pp30-40.


 [3]   NCS Manual 3-1-1. "Telecommunications Service Priority (TSP) System for National
       Security Emergency Preparedness (NSEP) Service User Manual," July 9, 1990.


 [4]   National Research Council. Growing Vulnerability of the Public Switched Networks. Na-
       tional Academy Press, 1989.


 [5]   National Security Telecommunications Advisory Council. "Report of the Network Se-
       curity Task Force," 1990.


 [6]   National Security Telecommunications Advisory Council. "Final Report of the Network
       Security Task Force," August 17, 1992.

 [7]   "Installation and Maintenance Responsibilities -
                                                     SS7 Link and Trunk Installation and
       Maintenance Access Services; Network Operations Forum Reference Document," Issue
       3, January 1993.


 [8]   B. Bagwill, et   al.   "Security in   Open Systems," National Institute of Standards and
       Technology Special PubHcation 800-7.

 [9]   Bell Operating Companies.       ONA Services User Guide: Services Descriptions, July 31,
       1993.


[10]   S.Homayoon, G. Giridharagopal. "ONA: Demands on Provisioning and Performance,"
       IEEE Globecom, IEEE, 1988.

[11]   S.E. Dolan.    "Open Network Architecture from an Operational Perspective," IEEE
       Globecom, IEEE, 1988.

[12]   L.   Simpson. "Open Network Architecture:         0AM Perspective, an RBOC's View," IEEE
       Globecom, IEEE, 1988.

[13]   Benjamin Lisowski. "ESP Requirements for BOC Network Operations and Management
       Systems," IEEE Globecom, IEEE, 1988.

[14]   Intelligent Networks Task Force.       "The Impact of Intelligent Networks (IN) on NS/EP
       Telecommunications," November 7, 1990.

[15]   F.S.    Dworak. "Approaches to Detecting and Resolving Feature Interactions," IEEE
       Globecom, 1991.

[16]   Che-Fn Yu. "Access Controls for Open Architecture in Intelligent Networks," IEEE
       Globecom, 1991.



                                                    23
Office of the Manager National Communications System (OMNCS). "Natural and Tech-
nological Disaster Threats to NS/EP Telecommunications," November 1992.

Office of the Manager National Communications System (OMNCS).       "Summary of the
Threat to National Security and Emergency Preparedness Telecommunications," June
1993.

Office of the Manager National Communications System (OMNCS). "The The Elec-
tronic Intrusion Threat to National Security and Emergency Preparedness (NS/EP)
Telecommunications: An Awareness Document," September 30, 1993.

Bell Communications Research. "Plan for the Second Generation of the Intelligent Net-
work," Special Report, SR-NPL-000444, Issue 1, July 1986.

Final Decision, 77 FCC 2d at 420. para 93.

Filing   and Review of Open Network Architecture Plans, 4 FCC Red 1 (1988) (BOG
ONA Order).
Memorandum Opinion and Order on Reconsideration, Filing and Review of Open Net-
work Architecture Plans, CC Docket No. 88-2, Phase I FCC No. 90-134 (released May
8,   1990).

Memorandum Opinion and Order, Filing and Review of Open Network Architecture
Plans, CC Docket No. 88-2, Phase I FCC No. 90-135 (released May 8, 1990) (BOC
ONA Amendment Order).
Phase I Order, 104 FCC 2d.

Memorandum Opinion and Order, Filing and Review of Open Network Architecture
Plans, CC Docket No. 88-2, Phase I FCC No. 90-382 (released December 19, 1991).

Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions Annual Report 1993.

"Information Industry Liaison Committee ONA News," May 1993, Vol. 3, No. 2.




                                                                                            I




                                                                                        I




                                       24
A FCC ONA Orders
The FCC declined to provide a specific standard for ONA [1, page 1067]. Rather, it placed
the burden for the development of Open Network Architectures on the carriers. In the event
the standardization process for ONA became a process in which each of the carriers would
submit an ONA plan, the FCC would rule on which aspects of the plan were acceptable and
which were not, and return the plan to the carrier for revision. Several iterations of this
process eventually produced a satisfactory initial plan for each carrier. In addition to FCC
review, the ONA plans are subject to public comment. The FCC has taken into account
numerous comments and petitions filed by parties of interest for reconsideration and/or
clarification of   ONA plans.
   The FCC's Third Computer Inquiry directed the carriers to file initial ONA plans with
the FCC by February 1, 1988. On November 17, 1988, the FCC adopted the BOC ONA
Order [22]. Among other things, this order approved in part the ONA plans for each of the
carriers, directed each carrier to file an amended ONA plan by May 19, 1989, and established
procedures for oversight of the ongoing ONA process. On May 8, 1990, the FCC released the
BOC ONA Amendment Order [24] which concluded that all the amended plans complied with
the requirements of the BOC ONA Order. ONA plans for each carrier are continually being
amended to reflect changes in services offered and to comply with additional requirements
of the FCC.




                                             25
B       Committees of Interest to ONA
The work of standardization with regard to the physical implementation of the services de-
scribed in the ONA plans is very much a current issue, with work being carried out in various
committees of the Exchange Carriers Standards Association (ECSA). ECSA was created in
1983 with the mission to "promote the timely resolution of national and international issues
involving telecommunications standards and the development of operation guidelines"       [27].
In October 1993 ECSA was renamed the Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions
(ATIS) and its membership was expanded to include all domestic providers of telecommu-
nications services with a plant investment in transport and/or switching equipment. ATIS
currently oversees eight committees including those described below.
     In the Third   Computer Inquiry, the FCC stated that private standards organizations,
such as the Tl Committee, should play a major role in resolving issues of interest to carriers
and enhanced service providers [1, page 1067]. Committee Tl was established in 1983 and
is accredited by the American National Standards Institute.      This committee "provides a
proactive role in establishing consistent telecommunications standards worldwide to facilitate
the deployment of interoperable telecommunications systems and services" [27]. Current
areas of technical focus include Signaling System 7 (SS7) Interconnection, Integrated Services
Digital Network (ISDN), Intelligent Network (IN), and Switch Survivability. Two committees
that have addressed ONA issues are the TlMl and TlEl Committees.
    The TlMl. 5 Committee, whose focus is on access in a network-network interconnection
context, has been working on security requirements for interconnected Telecommunications
Management Networks (TMNs). TlMl. 5 work is relevant to ONA because work on securing
operations environments is needed to support ONA.
    The Information Industry Liaison Committee (IILC) was established in 1987 as a forum
to exchange information on ONA. Participation in the IILC is open to all parties interested
in ONA. The mission of the IILC is to obtain industry consensus on technical, operational,
and administrative issues related to ONA. Requests for ONA services are accepted as Issues.
Issues remain active until consensus is reached or a lack of overall interest in the issue is
demonstrated. Resolved issues become voluntary recommendations that IILC participants
generally adhere to. It is possible for each carrier to tailor an IILC recommendation.
    In specific cases, for example the Operations Support Systems (OSS) capabilities issue
(see section D), the FCC has directed the carriers to work through the IILC. In the BOC
ONA Order, the FCC directed the carriers to amend their ONA plans to reflect progress in
the IILC. The IILC is the primary forum used to resolve ONA issues.
   The IILC has touched upon a few security related ONA issues. Any member of the IILC
is allowed to propose new issues for requested services. Therefore, the framework is in place
for additional services to be incorporated into ONA, including services that support NS/EP.
Specific requests for enhanced services are evaluated based on expected market demand,
their utihty as perceived by ESPs, and the technical and cost feasibihty of unbundling and
providing those services.
     Members of the IILC have worked together to resolve many ONA issues. Implementation
of services based  on IILC recommendations can be complicated. Many services are not
offered due to lack of customer demand, cost or operational difficulty. For example. Issue
012 (Ability to Detect Breaks in Telco Lines Within 60 Seconds) was adopted on March 22,


                                              26
1989 however today only four carriers offer this service. Issue 003 (ESP/Customer Access
to   BOC Network Management Systems (OSS)) was adopted March 15, 1988 however only
one carrier currently offers this service.
   Forums under the Carrier Liaison Committee (CLC) may address areas of interest to
ONA. Forums that may cover areas related to ONA include the Ordering and Billing Forum
and the Network Operations Forum. The Network Operations Forum (NOF) covers Toll
Fraud Prevention and SS7 Network Testing. The NOF has done security work relevant to
ONA in the following areas:
     1.   Security baseline for interconnected SS7 networks.

     2.   Security information sharing among carriers and vendors supplying equipment to the
          carriers for use in   SS7 networks.   The sharing is focused on holes found in vendor
          products.




                                                   27
C        ONA Services
Carriers are required to satisfy all ESP requests for services that meet the FCC's criteria of
demand, utility, technical feasibility, and costing feasibility. Each ONA plan describes a set of
Basic Service Elements (BSEs), Basic Serving Arrangements (BSAs) and Complementary
Network Services (CNSs) supplied by the service provider and based on a set of requests
for services placed by the ESPs. Basic Service Elements are optional unbundled features,
such as calling number identification, that ESPs may require in providing an enhanced
service. Basic Serving Arrangements are fundamental switching and transport services. ESPs
obtain access to various Basic Service Elements through Basic Serving Arrangements.          An
example of a Basic Serving Arrangements is the physical connection to the telephone network.
Complementary Network Services are optional unbundled basic service features that an end
user may obtain from a carrier in order to use an enhanced service. Call forwarding is an
example of a Complementary Network Service. Basic Serving Arrangements, Basic Service
Elements, and Complementary Network Services cannot be ordered until appropriate tariffs
are effective. The carriers are required to satisfy all ESP requests that meet the FCC's
criteria of demand, utility, technical feasibility and costing feasibility.
    BOC ONA Special Report Number 1, Issue 2 (October 1987) listed 118 ONA services
requested by ESPs prior to the filing of initial ONA plans. A few ONA services are no longer
olTered and many new services have been added. Currently, there are over 150 services.
Amendments to an ONA plan must be filed before a carrier is allowed to offer a new service.
An example of a representative set of services can be found in "ONA Services: Names,
Descriptions, Cross References" [9]. This document is also known as the "ONA Services
User Guide."
    It   should be noted that the initial standardization efforts involved in the provision of
the ONA plans by the carriers related primarily to the nature of the services offered, and
not to the interactions between the different services or the nature of such interactions.
This is because, in the large majority of cases, the services that were to become the Basic
Service Elements and Basic Serving Arrangements were already in existence prior to the
ONA mandate, and as such so were the communications protocols used between the the
service elements. The ONA mandate does not address how Basic Service Elements/Basic
Serving Arrangements should interact, merely that they should be available on an individual
basis to the ESPs and be nondiscriminatory.
    In various orders, the FCC addressed     two types of uniformity: availabihty of services
and technical uniformity.     After reviewing initial   ONA plans, the FCC noted significant
differences in ONA services offered by the carriers. Of the 118 services requested by ESPs,
in the original ONA plans, the carriers offered 29 common services with an average of 54
services offered by each carrier. In an attempt to increase the uniformity of services offered
among the carriers, the FCC required each carrier to review other carriers' plans and to
try to increase the number of ONA services offered by each carrier's ONA plan [22]. The
amended plans indicated that 37 services were offered on a nationwide basis and that each
carrier proposed to offer an average of 70 services [24].
    Today, the number of services offered by the carriers has increased, but there is still con-
siderable difference in the number of services offered by the individual carriers. The Services
Descriptions section of "The    ONA Services User Guide" [9] represents an agreement on the


                                               28
part of the carriers for uniform names and technical descriptions of the Basic Serving Ar-
rangements, Basic Service Elements, and Complementary Network Services. For each ONA
service, a table is provided that lists the generic name of the   ONA service or Basic Serving
Arrangements, which carrier plans to offer the service, the individual carrier's product name,
and whether the carrier classifies the service as Basic Serving Arrangements, Basic Service
Elements, or Complementary Network Service. The "ONA Services User Guide" directs the
reader to refer to the individual BOC ONA plans and amendments for information on BOC
availability and deployment plans for ONA services.
    Although the FCC noted that technical uniformity in the initial offerings would be diffi-
cult to achieve because of the differences in embedded technology and uncertainties in market
demand, the FCC directed the carriers to continue working through the IILC to develop pro-
cedures for achieving uniformity in key services areas. In the BOC ONA Amendment Order,
AT&T expressed concern about the carriers' use of different technical means of providing
similar   ONA services.




                                              29
D         ONA Security Capabilities
The FCC has relied on the carriers to develop their own open network architectures and the
FCC relies on the carriers to ensure that the services provided are secure. A review of the
implementation of each ONA plan is needed to determine the level of security provided by-
each ONA implementation. The FCC's requirements for security capabilities have resulted
primarily from the requirement that   ONA services be provided in a nondiscriminatory man-
ner.     The primary purpose of ONA security capabihties required by the FCC was not to
provide security in the traditional sense, but to prevent a marketing advantage.
    Current ONA security related capabilities which provide some degree of confidentiality
and integrity of information fall into two areas: protection of Customer Proprietary Network
Information and provision of Operations Support Systems services.


D.l        Customer Proprietary Network Information
In the Third  Computer Inquiry, many commenters argued that the BOCs had an unfair
marketing advantage for enhanced services because the BOCs had access to the customer
proprietary network information (CPNI) for subscribers of the carrier's basic network ser-
vices. Other parties argued that the BOCs could use their databases to generate aggregate
information on usage levels and traffic patterns for network services and that this information
would be of substantial value in the technical and economic design of enhanced services.
    The BOC ONA Amendment Order required that a password/ID system be used to re-
strict CPNI access for certain databases routinely accessed by enhanced services marketing

personnel. This order did not require that the BOCs implement password/ID systems for
auxiliary databases that contained fragmented CPNI or are not routinely accessed by en-
hanced services marketing personnel[24, pages 58, 63].
    Although the password/ID systems provide a certain degree of confidentiality, the initial
purpose of the password/ID systems was not to provide security in the traditional sense, but
to prevent a marketing advantage.



D.2        Operations Support Systems
Operations Support Systems (OSS) include diagnostic, maintenance, and network manage-
ment capabilities that are of use to ESPs in controlling their telecommunications services
           Computer Inquiry III did not require the BOCs to offer OSS services, however,
efficiently.

the BOC ONA Order directed the BOCs to amend their plans to specify OSS services that
could be offered to ESPs in the near term [22, para. 110]. Recognizing that a number of
issues associated withOSS services might need to be resolved before customers can access
the BOCs internal systems, the FCC directed the BOCs to examine, through the IILC, the
most feasible means of providing OSS access for ESPs [22, para. 110].
   For the most part, access to and control of OAM&P functions support the network.
However, these functionalities are not an essential part of the network required to convey
customer information from point to point, and are therefore beyond the requirements of
ONA [12]. The BOC ONA Order defined ancillary services to be unregulated, competitive
services useful to   ESPs. Depending on the criteria, OSS services may be offered either as


                                              30
ON A services or as tariffed services not subject to ON A requirements. The following list
groups OSS services into four categories:

     1.   Service Order Entry and Status

          Services requested by ESPs include a service to speed up     and automate the service
          order process by placing service orders electronically and a service to determine the
          status of service orders electronically.

     2.   Trouble Reporting and Status

          Services requested by ESPs include a service to enter a trouble report into a carrier
          database and subsequently check its status.

     3.   Traffic Data Collection

          This capability refers to information ESPs need to analyze traffic volume and conges-
          tion on their lines.

     4.   Diagnostics, Monitoring, Testing, and Network Reconfiguration

          Services requested by ESPs include services for testing and reconfiguration abilities.


     The carriers proposed providing indirect access to OSS services for ESPs, yet direct access
for themselves.Keeping comparably efficient access in mind, in the BOG Amendment Order,
the FCC required that the carrier's enhanced services operations take the same access to
OSS services as the access provided by the carrier to ESPs. This issue is commonly known
as the     OSS same access issue.
   ONA plans revolve around Basic Service Elements (BSEs), Basic Serving Arrangements
(BSAs), and Complementary Network Services (CNSs). The BOC ONA Amendment Order
requirement for OSS same access only applies to Basic Service Elements and Basic Serving
Arrangements. There is a requirement for OSS access for Complementary Network Services,
however the carrier's enhanced services operations are not required to take the same access
to OSS services as the access provided to the ESPs.       OSS access for Complementary Network
Services will require stricter security than OSS access for Basic Service Elements and Basic
Serving Arrangements because Complementary Network Services include access to customer
lines.

      On February 22, 1990, the IILC reached consensus on Issue ^^003 ESP Customer Access
                                                                          -


to   BOC Network Management System. "The resolution identifies OSS capabilities useful to
ESPs, and establishes a commitment to develop a generic software gateway interface" [26]. As
directed by the FCC in the BOC ONA Order, at its April 1993 meeting, the IILC accepted
Issue #039 - ESP Needs for OSS Capabihties Associated with End-User Complementary
Network Services. "The purpose of this issue is to determine ESP needs for OSS capabihties
for Complementary Network Services associated with end-user lines, and to develop methods
as to how those needs could be met through some kind of indirect OSS access" [28].
    A gateway approach was considered by the carriers and the IILC to allow access to OSS
services but consensus has not been reached on this issue. Depending on the configuration, a
gateway could either be used to deter or assist unauthorized ESPs and end-users in accessing
OSS services.

                                                     31
   Several articles (e.g.   [11],   [12],   [13])   have addressed OAM&P aspects of ONA. Many
of these aspects can be categorized by the four areas of OSS services defined by the FCC.
Appendix E describes several OSS ONA products that are listed in the "Ona Services User
Guide". Note that additional OSS services may be offered to ESPs as tariffed services not
subject to   ONA requirements.




                                                       32
E         ONA Services of Interest to NS/EP
As the number of ONA services increases along with the complexity of these services, the
potential for vulnerabilities associated with       ONA services also increases. Although there
are over 100 ONA services, all of which have the potential to impact NS/EP in some form
(e.g., if an ONA service contains vulnerabilities, exploitation of the vulnerabilities may affect

the availability and reliability of the PSN), this section will describe a few ONA services of
particular concern to   NS/EP. The following list describes OSS ONA services as they are
described in the July 1994 "ONA Services User Guide." The services are grouped according
to the four categories considered by the FCC to be basic OSS services. Services are listed ac-
cording to their generic ONA service name. As noted in section 4.9, in providing ESP access
to OAM&P systems, safeguards must be maintained by the carriers to prevent inadvertent
errors, or harm to the network and OAM&P databases by the accessing party. Vulnerabil-
ities    associated with   ONA services that support OAM&P functions have the potential to
                                        PSN. Some of the services listed below support
affect the availability and reliability of the
NS/EP by providing a way to monitor and respond to problems in the PSN.

    1.   Service Order Entry and Status

            •   Access To Operations Support Systems Information
                This service will offer the ESPs a common, mechanized presentation system for
                access to Network Management products, such as network reconfiguration, while
                also providing ESP  customer access to internal operations support systems for
                additional information and control of their network.
                This service will provide a secure and user friendly interface to ESP customers
                in providing capabilities    and support in some or all of the following areas of
                service management: (1) Administration, (2) Security, (3) Performance, (4) Fault
                Management, (5) Reconfiguration, and (6) Accounting.
            •   Access to Order Entry System
                This capability will allow ESPs to provide basic ordering information to the busi-
                ness office through a mechanized interface.

    2.   Trouble Reporting and Status

            •   User Initiated Diagnostics
                This capability will allow ESPs to electronically report and check the status of
                local and access, circuit line troubles into support systems.


    3.   Traffic Data Collection


            •   Traffic Data Reports

                This capability provides ESPs with periodic printed summaries of traffic data on
                their network facilities that are associated with central office switches. Traffic
                data reports include traffic information such as number of call attempts, number
                of blocked calls, and usage by ESP trunk group.



                                                    33
  4.   Diagnostics, Monitoring, Testing, and Network Reconfiguration

          •     Dedicated Alert Transport Basic Serving Arrangement
                The dedicated alert transport Basic Serving Arrangement using derived local
                channel technology would offer ESPs a 24 hour supervised monitoring capabil-
                ity using existing local loop access lines.

          • Verify Integrity of Subscriber Lines

                This capability allows an ESP to be signaled by central office equipment every 60
                seconds or less to report on the integrity of the ESP's client's hues that are being
                monitored for breaks.

          •     Network Reconfiguration
                This feature provides ESPs flexibility in managing and reconfiguring their dedi-
                cated facilities.

          •     Access To Operations Support Systems Information
                The product currently available for this ONA Service supports network reconfig-
                uration.


    The following is a list of a few ONA services that are not OSS services, but are of interest
to NS/EP. The following list describes ONA services as they are described in the July 1993
"ONA Services User Guide."    These services are categorized by their generic ONA service
name. While vulnerabilities associated with the services listed below have the capability to
negatively impact NS/EP, these services can support the availability of the PSN.


   •   Alternate Routing

       When all the circuits in an ESP's circuit switched trunk serving arrangement with
       alternate route capability are busy due to traffic volume the network will attempt to
       complete subsequent calls to an alternate route served by that switch as previously
       specified by the ESP.


   •   Automatic Protection Switching
       Automatic Protection Switching provides the ability to monitor a non-switched facility
       between the ESP premises and the wire center serving the premises and to automat-
       ically switch to a spare facility if the performance of the original facility degrades or
       fails.


   •   Route Diversity
       Route Diversity provides an increased safety factor for ESP facilities that could be
       subject to disruption from cable cuts and other unavoidable catastrophes. It provides
       for diverse routing when necessary in order to comply with special ESP requirements.




                                                    34
            ANNOUNCEMENT OF NEW PUBLICATIONS ON
                    COMPUTER SECURITY




Superintendent of Documents
Government Printing Office
Washington, DC 20402



Dear Sir:

  Please add my name to the announcement Hst of new publications to be issued in
the series: National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-.


Name

Company

Address

City                            State                      Zip Code




(Notification key N-503)
                                    Technical Publications
Periodical

                                                                                       —
Journal of Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Reports NIST research
and development in those disciplines of the physical and engineering sciences in which the Institute is
active. These include physics, chemistry, engineering, mathematics, and computer sciences. Papers cover a
broad range of subjects, with major emphasis on measurement methodology and the basic technology
underlying standardization. Also included from time to time are survey articles on topics closely related to
the Institute's technical and scientific programs. Issued six times a year.




Nonperiodicals

Monographs   —Major                                        on various
                         contributions to the technical literature               subjects related to the
                    and
Institute's scientific     technical activities.
Handbooks—Recommended codes of engineering and                 industrial practice
                                                                       (including     codes) safety         devel-
oped  incooperation with                                              and regulatory
                            interested industries, professional organizations,                    bodies.
Special Publications— Include proceedings of conferences sponsored by NIST, NIST annual                reports, and
other special publications appropriate to this grouping such as wall charts, pocket cards, and bibliographies.

National Standard Reference Data Series            —Provides   quantitative data on the physical and chemical
properties of materials, compiled from the world's literature and critically evaluated. Developed under a
worldwide program coordinated by NIST under the authority of the National Standard Data Act (Public
Law 90-396). NOTE: The Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data (JPCRD) is published
bimonthly for NIST by the American Chemical Society (ACS) and the American Institute of Physics (AIP).
Subscriptions, reprints, and supplements are available from ACS, 1155 Sixteenth St., NW, Washington, DC
20056.
                           —
Building Science Series Disseminates technical information developed at the Institute on building
materials, components, systems, and whole structures. The series presents research results, test methods, and
performance criteria related to the structural and environmental functions and the durability and safety
characteristics of building elements and systems.

Technical Notes   —   Studies or reports which are complete in themselves but restrictive in their treatment of
a subject. Analogous to monographs but not so comprehensive in scope or definitive in treatment of the
subject area. Often serve as a vehicle for final reports of work performed at NIST under the sponsorship of
other government agencies.
                                  —
Voluntary Product Standards Developed under procedures published by the Department of Commerce
in Part 10, Title 15, of the Code of Federal Regulations. The standards establish nationally recognized
requirements for products, and provide all concerned interests with a basis for common understanding of
the characteristics of the products. NIST administers this program in support of the efforts of private-sector
standardizing organizations.

Order the following NIST publications     —FIPS and NISTIRs—from the National Technical Information
Service, Springfield, VA 22161.

                                                                                —
Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUB) Publications in this series
collectively constitute the Federal Information Processing Standards Register. The Register serves as the
official source of information in the Federal Government regarding standards issued by NIST pursuant to
the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended. Public Law 89-306 (79 Stat.
1127), and as implemented by Executive Order 1 1717 (38 FR 12315, dated May 11, 1973) and Part 6 of
Title 15   CFR (Code of Federal Regulations).
NIST Interagency Reports (NISTIR)          —A      special series of interim or final reports on work performed by
NIST for outside sponsors (both government and nongovernment). In general, initial distribution is handled
by the sponsor; public distribution is by the National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA 22161,
in paper copy or microfiche form.
U.S. Department of Commerce
National Institute of Standards
and Technology
Gaithersburg,   MD    20899-0001

Official Business
Penalty for Private Use $300
