                       Archived NIST Technical Series Publication
The attached publication has been archived (withdrawn), and is provided solely for historical purposes.
It may have been superseded by another publication (indicated below).

Archived Publication
Series/Number:             NIST Special Publication 800-121
Title:
                           Guide to Bluetooth Security

Publication Date(s):       September 2008
Withdrawal Date:           June 2012
Withdrawal Note:
                           SP 800-121 is superseded in its entirety by the publication of
                           SP 800-121 Revision 1 (June 2012).


Superseding Publication(s)
The attached publication has been superseded by the following publication(s):

Series/Number:           NIST Special Publication 800-121 Revision 1
Title:
                         Guide to Bluetooth Security

Author(s):
                         Quynh Dang

Publication Date(s):     June 2012
URL/DOI:                 http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.121r1

Additional Information (if applicable)
Contact:                 Computer Security Division (Information Technology Lab)
Latest revision of the
                         SP 800-121 Revision 1 (as of August 12, 2015)
attached publication:
Related information:
                         http://csrc.nist.gov/

Withdrawal
                         N/A
announcement (link):




Date updated: ƵŐƵƐƚϭϮ, 2015
                             Special Publication 800-121




Guide to Bluetooth Security

Recommendations of the National Institute of
Standards and Technology


Karen Scarfone
John Padgette
NIST Special Publication 800-121   Guide to Bluetooth Security

                                   Recommendations of the National
                                   Institute of Standards and Technology

                                   Karen Scarfone
                                   John Padgette




    C O M P U T E R                               S E C U R I T Y

                                   Computer Security Division
                                   Information Technology Laboratory
                                   National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                   Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930

                                   September 2008




                  DRAFT            U.S. Department of Commerce

                                          Carlos M. Gutierrez, Secretary
                                   National Institute of Standards and Technology

                                          Dr. Patrick D. Gallagher, Deputy Director
                                                                                      GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY




                         Reports on Computer Systems Technology

The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST) promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical leadership for the nation’s
measurement and standards infrastructure. ITL develops tests, test methods, reference data, proof of
concept implementations, and technical analysis to advance the development and productive use of
information technology. ITL’s responsibilities include the development of technical, physical,
administrative, and management standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of
sensitive unclassified information in Federal computer systems. This Special Publication 800-series
reports on ITL’s research, guidance, and outreach efforts in computer security and its collaborative
activities with industry, government, and academic organizations.


               National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-121
                   Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 800-121, 43 pages (Sep. 2008)




                 Certain commercial entities, equipment, or materials may be identified in this
                document in order to describe an experimental procedure or concept adequately.
              Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the
              National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the
               entities, materials, or equipment are necessarily the best available for the purpose.




                                                        ii
                                                                            GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



                                      Acknowledgments

The authors, Karen Scarfone of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) and John
Padgette of Booz Allen Hamilton, wish to thank their colleagues who reviewed drafts of this document
and contributed to its technical content. The authors would like to acknowledge Sheila Frankel, Tim
Grance, and Tom Karygiannis of NIST, and Derrick Dicoi, Matthew Sexton, and Michael Bang of Booz
Allen Hamilton, for their keen and insightful assistance throughout the development of the document.
The authors also greatly appreciate the feedback provided by representatives from the Department of
State, Gerry Barsczewski (Social Security Administration), Alex Froede (Defense Information Systems
Agency [DISA]), and Dave Wallace and Mark Nichols (Spanalytics).




                                       Note to Readers

This document was originally released for public comment as part of Draft NIST Special Publication (SP)
800-48 Revision 1, Wireless Network Security for IEEE 802.11a/b/g and Bluetooth, which also provides
information on securing legacy wireless local area networks (WLAN) unable to comply with the IEEE
802.11i security standard. Based on reviewer feedback, the Bluetooth material was removed from SP
800-48 Revision 1 and placed in this publication instead. Readers seeking information on WLAN
security should consult the final version of SP 800-48 Revision 1, Guide to Securing Legacy IEEE 802.11
Wireless Networks for legacy WLANs and SP 800-97, Establishing Wireless Robust Security Networks: A
Guide to IEEE 802.11i for current WLANs.




                                                  iii
                                                                                                         GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



                                                    Table of Contents

Executive Summary..............................................................................................................ES-1

1.    Introduction ......................................................................................................................1-1
       1.1     Authority...................................................................................................................1-1
       1.2     Purpose and Scope .................................................................................................1-1
       1.3     Audience and Assumptions .....................................................................................1-1
       1.4     Document Organization ...........................................................................................1-2
2.    Overview of Bluetooth Technology................................................................................2-1
       2.1     Bluetooth Technology Characteristics .....................................................................2-1
       2.2     Bluetooth Architecture..............................................................................................2-3
3.    Bluetooth Security Features ...........................................................................................3-1
       3.1     Security Features of Bluetooth Specifications .........................................................3-2
       3.2     Link Key Generation ................................................................................................3-2
               3.2.1 Security Modes 2 and 3................................................................................3-3
               3.2.2 Security Mode 4............................................................................................3-4
       3.3     Authentication ..........................................................................................................3-5
       3.4     Confidentiality ..........................................................................................................3-7
       3.5     Trust Levels, Service Levels, and Authorization ......................................................3-9
4.    Bluetooth Vulnerabilities, Threats, and Countermeasures ..........................................4-1
       4.1     Bluetooth Vulnerabilities ..........................................................................................4-1
       4.2     Bluetooth Threats.....................................................................................................4-2
       4.3     Risk Mitigation and Countermeasures .....................................................................4-3
       4.4     Bluetooth Security Checklists ..................................................................................4-4


                                                   List of Appendices

Appendix A— Glossary of Terms.......................................................................................... A-1

Appendix B— Acronyms and Abbreviations ....................................................................... B-1

Appendix C— References ...................................................................................................... C-1

Appendix D— Online Resources........................................................................................... D-1




                                                                    iv
                                                                                               GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



                                                   List of Figures

Figure 2-1. Bluetooth Ad Hoc Topology....................................................................................2-3
Figure 2-2. Bluetooth Networks (Multiple Scatternets) .............................................................2-4
Figure 3-1. Bluetooth Air-Interface Security..............................................................................3-1
Figure 3-2. Link Key Generation from PIN (v2.0 & earlier) .......................................................3-3
Figure 3-3. Link Key Establishment for Secure Simple Pairing ................................................3-5
Figure 3-4. Bluetooth Authentication.........................................................................................3-6
Figure 3-5. Bluetooth Encryption Procedure.............................................................................3-8


                                                   List of Tables

Table 2-1. Bluetooth Device Classes of Power Management...................................................2-2
Table 4-1. Key Problems with Existing (Native) Bluetooth Security..........................................4-1
Table 4-2. Bluetooth Piconet Security Checklist .......................................................................4-5
Table 4-3. Bluetooth Headset Security Checklist....................................................................4-10
Table 4-4. Bluetooth Smart Card Reader Security Checklist ..................................................4-12




                                                               v
                                                                                GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



Executive Summary

Bluetooth is an open standard for short-range radio frequency (RF) communication. Bluetooth
technology is used primarily to establish wireless personal area networks (WPAN), commonly referred to
as ad hoc or peer-to-peer (P2P) networks. Bluetooth technology has been integrated into many types of
business and consumer devices, including cellular phones, personal digital assistants (PDA), laptops,
automobiles, printers, and headsets. This allows users to form ad hoc networks between a wide variety of
devices to transfer voice and data. This document provides an overview of Bluetooth technology and
discusses related security concerns.

There have been several versions of Bluetooth, with the most recent being 2.0 + Enhanced Data Rate
(EDR) (November 2004) and 2.1 + EDR (July 2007). While 2.0 + EDR provided faster transmission
speeds than previous versions (up to 3 Mbits/second), 2.1 + EDR provides a significant security
improvement for link key generation and management in the form of Secure Simple Pairing (SSP). This
publication addresses the security of these versions of Bluetooth, as well as the earlier versions 1.1 and
1.2.

Bluetooth technology and associated devices are susceptible to general wireless networking threats, such
as denial of service attacks, eavesdropping, man-in-the-middle attacks, message modification, and
resource misappropriation. They are also threatened by more specific Bluetooth-related attacks that target
known vulnerabilities in Bluetooth implementations and specifications. Attacks against improperly
secured Bluetooth implementations can provide attackers with unauthorized access to sensitive
information and unauthorized usage of Bluetooth devices and other systems or networks to which the
devices are connected.

To improve the security of Bluetooth implementations, organizations should implement the following
recommendations:

Organizations should use the strongest Bluetooth security mode available for their Bluetooth
devices.

The Bluetooth specifications define four security modes, and each version of Bluetooth supports some,
but not all, of these modes. The modes vary primarily by how well they protect Bluetooth
communications from potential attack. Security Mode 3 is considered the strongest mode because it
requires authentication and encryption to be established before the Bluetooth physical link is completely
established. Security Modes 2 and 4 also use authentication and encryption, but only after the Bluetooth
physical link has already been fully established and logical channels partially established. Security Mode
1 provides no security functionality. The available modes vary based on the Bluetooth specification
versions of both devices, so organizations should choose the most secure mode available for each case.

Organizations using Bluetooth technology should address Bluetooth technology in their security
policies and change default settings of Bluetooth devices to reflect the policies.

A security policy that defines requirements for Bluetooth security is the foundation for all other
Bluetooth-related countermeasures. The policy should include a list of approved uses for Bluetooth, a list
of the types of information that may be transferred over Bluetooth networks, and requirements for
selecting and using Bluetooth personal identification numbers (PIN). After establishing Bluetooth
security policy, organizations should ensure that Bluetooth devices’ default settings are reviewed and
changed as needed so that they comply with the security policy requirements. For example, a typical
requirement is that unneeded Bluetooth profiles and services be disabled to reduce the number of



                                                   ES-1
                                                                                 GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



vulnerabilities that attackers could attempt to exploit. When available, a centralized security policy
management approach should be used to ensure device configurations are compliant.

Organizations should ensure that their Bluetooth users are made aware of their security-related
responsibilities regarding Bluetooth use.

A security awareness program helps users to follow security practices that help prevent security incidents.
For example, users should be provided with a list of precautionary measures they should take to better
protect handheld Bluetooth devices from theft. Users should also be made aware of other actions to take
involving Bluetooth device security, such as ensuring that Bluetooth devices are turned off when they are
not needed to minimize exposure to malicious activities, and performing Bluetooth device pairing as
infrequently as possible and ideally in a physically secure area where attackers cannot observe key entry
and eavesdrop on Bluetooth pairing-related communications.




                                                   ES-2
                                                                                GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



1.    Introduction

1.1   Authority

The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) developed this document in furtherance of its
statutory responsibilities under the Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA) of 2002,
Public Law 107-347.

NIST is responsible for developing standards and guidelines, including minimum requirements, for
providing adequate information security for all agency operations and assets; however, such standards and
guidelines shall not apply to national security systems. This guideline is consistent with the requirements
of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130, Section 8b (3), “Securing Agency
Information Systems,” as analyzed in A-130, Appendix IV: Analysis of Key Sections. Supplemental
information is provided in A-130, Appendix III.

This guideline has been prepared for use by Federal agencies. It may be used by nongovernmental
organizations on a voluntary basis and is not subject to copyright, although attribution is desired.

Nothing in this document should be taken to contradict standards and guidelines made mandatory and
binding on Federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under statutory authority, nor should these
guidelines be interpreted as altering or superseding the existing authorities of the Secretary of Commerce,
Director of the OMB, or any other Federal official.

1.2   Purpose and Scope

The purpose of this document is to provide information to organizations on the security capabilities of
Bluetooth and provide recommendations to organizations employing Bluetooth technologies on securing
them effectively.

1.3   Audience and Assumptions

This document discusses Bluetooth technologies and security capabilities in technical detail. This
document assumes that the readers have at least some operating system, wireless networking, and security
knowledge. Because of the constantly changing nature of the wireless security industry and the threats
and vulnerabilities to the technologies, readers are strongly encouraged to take advantage of other
resources (including those listed in this document) for more current and detailed information.

The following list highlights people with differing roles and responsibilities that might use this document:

 Government managers (e.g., chief information officers and senior managers) who oversee the use and
  security of Bluetooth technologies within their organizations
 Systems engineers and architects who design and implement Bluetooth technologies
 Auditors, security consultants, and others who perform security assessments of wireless environments
 Researchers and analysts who are trying to understand the underlying wireless technologies.




                                                    1-1
                                                                               GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



1.4   Document Organization

The remainder of this document is composed of the following sections and appendices:

 Section 2 provides an overview of Bluetooth technology, including its benefits, technical
  characteristics, and architecture.
 Section 3 discusses the security features defined in the Bluetooth specifications and highlights their
  limitations.
 Section 4 examines common vulnerabilities and threats involving Bluetooth technologies and makes
  recommendations for countermeasures to improve Bluetooth security.
 Appendix A provides a glossary of terms.
 Appendix B provides a list of acronyms and abbreviations used in this document.
 Appendix C lists Bluetooth references.
 Appendix D lists Bluetooth online resources.




                                                   1-2
                                                                                               GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



2.      Overview of Bluetooth Technology

Bluetooth is an open standard for short-range radio frequency (RF) communication. Bluetooth
technology is used primarily to establish wireless personal area networks (WPAN), commonly referred to
as ad hoc or peer-to-peer (P2P) networks. Bluetooth technology has been integrated into many types of
business and consumer devices, including cellular phones, personal digital assistants (PDA), laptops,
automobiles, printers, and headsets. This allows users to form ad hoc networks between a wide variety of
devices to transfer voice and data. Bluetooth is a low-cost, low-power technology that provides a
mechanism for creating small wireless networks on an ad hoc basis, known as piconets. 1 A piconet is
composed of two or more Bluetooth devices in close physical proximity that operate on the same channel
using the same frequency hopping sequence. An example of a piconet is a Bluetooth-based connection
between a cellular phone and a Bluetooth-enabled ear bud.

Bluetooth piconets are often established on a temporary and changing basis, which offers communication
flexibility and scalability between mobile devices. Some key benefits of Bluetooth technology are:

 Cable replacement. Bluetooth technology replaces a variety of cables, such as those traditionally
  used for peripheral devices (e.g., mouse and keyboard connections), printers, and wireless headsets
  and ear buds that interface with personal computers (PC) or mobile telephones.
 Ease of file sharing. A Bluetooth-enabled device can form a piconet to support file sharing
  capabilities with other Bluetooth devices, such as laptops.
 Wireless synchronization. Bluetooth provides automatic synchronization between Bluetooth-
  enabled devices. For example, Bluetooth allows synchronization of contact information contained in
  electronic address books and calendars.
 Internet connectivity. A Bluetooth device with Internet connectivity can share that access with other
  Bluetooth devices. For example, a laptop can use a Bluetooth connection to have a mobile phone
  establish a dial-up connection, so that the laptop can access the Internet through the phone.
Bluetooth technology was originally conceived by Ericsson in 1994. Ericsson, IBM, Intel, Nokia, and
Toshiba formed the Bluetooth Special Interest Group (SIG), a not-for-profit trade association developed
to drive the development of Bluetooth products and serve as the governing body for Bluetooth
specifications. 2 Bluetooth is standardized within the IEEE 802.15 Working Group for Wireless Personal
Area Networks that formed in early 1999 as IEEE 802.15.1-2002. 3

This section provides an overview of Bluetooth technology, such as frequency and data rates, range, and
architecture.

2.1     Bluetooth Technology Characteristics

Bluetooth operates in the unlicensed 2.4 gigahertz (GHz) to 2.4835 GHz Industrial, Scientific, and
Medical (ISM) frequency band. Numerous technologies operate in this band, including the IEEE
802.11b/g WLAN standard, making it somewhat crowded from the standpoint of the volume of wireless
transmissions. Bluetooth employs frequency hopping spread spectrum (FHSS) technology for all
transmissions. FHSS reduces interference and transmission errors and provides a limited level of
transmission security. With FHSS technology, communications between Bluetooth devices use 79
1
      As discussed in Section 2.2, the term “piconet” applies to both ad hoc and infrastructure Bluetooth networks.
2
      The Bluetooth SIG web site (http://www.bluetooth.com/) is a resource for Bluetooth-related information and provides
      numerous links to other sources of information.
3
      For more information, see the IEEE web site at http://grouper.ieee.org/groups/802/15/.


                                                              2-1
                                                                                                GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



different radio channels by hopping (i.e., changing) frequencies about 1600 times per second for
data/voice links and 3200 times per second during page and inquiry scanning. A channel is used for a
very short period (e.g. 625 microseconds for data/voice links), followed by a hop designated by a pre-
determined pseudo-random sequence to another channel; this process is repeated continuously in the
frequency-hopping sequence.

Bluetooth also provides for radio link power control, where devices can negotiate and adjust their radio
power according to signal strength measurements. Each device in a Bluetooth network can determine its
received signal strength indication (RSSI) and make a request of the other network device to adjust its
relative radio power level (i.e., have the transmission power incrementally increased or decreased). This
is performed to conserve power and/or to keep the received signal characteristics within a preferred range.

The combination of a frequency-hopping scheme and radio link power control provide Bluetooth with
some additional, albeit limited, protection from eavesdropping and malicious access. The frequency-
hopping scheme, primarily a technique to avoid interference, makes it slightly more difficult for an
adversary to locate and capture Bluetooth transmissions than transmission from direct sequence spread
spectrum technologies, like those using IEEE 802.11a/b/g. If the Bluetooth power control feature is used
appropriately, any potential adversary is forced to be in relatively close proximity to pose a threat to a
Bluetooth piconet, especially if the Bluetooth devices are very close to each other.

Bluetooth versions 1.1 and 1.2 specify transmission speeds of up to 1 megabit per second (Mbps) and
achieve throughput of approximately 720 kilobits per second (kbps). Bluetooth versions 2.0 + Enhanced
Data Rate (EDR) and 2.1 + EDR specify data rates up to 3 Mbps and throughput of approximately 2.1
Mbps.

The range of Bluetooth devices is characterized by three classes that define power management. Table 2-
1 summarizes the classes, including their power levels in milliwatts (mW) and decibels referenced to one
milliwatt (dBm), and their operating ranges in meters (m). 4 Most small, battery-powered devices are
Class 2, while Class 1 devices are typically USB dongles for desktop and laptop computers, as well as
access points and other AC-powered devices.

                              Table 2-1. Bluetooth Device Classes of Power Management

     Type      Power          Power Level          Designed Operating Range                      Sample Devices
                                                                                       AC-powered devices (USB dongles,
    Class 1      High      100 mW (20 dBm)          Up to 91 meters (300 feet)
                                                                                                access points)
                                                                                        Battery-powered devices (mobile
    Class 2    Medium       2.5 mW (4 dBm)           Up to 9 meters (30 feet)          devices, Bluetooth adapters, smart
                                                                                                 card readers)
                                                                                       Battery-powered devices (Bluetooth
    Class 3      Low         1 mW (0 dBm)              Up to 1 meter (3 feet)
                                                                                                   adapters)


So that Bluetooth devices can find and establish communication with each other, discoverable and
connectable modes are specified. A device in discoverable mode periodically listens on an inquiry scan
physical channel (based on a specific set of frequencies) and will respond to an inquiry on that channel
with its device address, local clock, and other characteristics needed to page and subsequently connect to
it. A device in connectable mode periodically listens on its page scan physical channel and will respond
to a page on that channel to initiate a network connection. The frequencies associated with the page scan

4
      The ranges listed in Table 2-1 are the designed operating ranges. Attackers may be able to intercept communications at
      significantly larger distances, especially if they use high gain antennas.


                                                               2-2
                                                                                                GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



physical channel for a device are based on its Bluetooth device address. Therefore, knowing a device’s
address and clock 5 is important for paging and subsequently connecting to the device.

2.2     Bluetooth Architecture

Bluetooth permits devices to establish either ad hoc or infrastructure networks. Infrastructure networks
use fixed Bluetooth access points (AP), which facilitate communication between Bluetooth devices. This
document focuses on ad hoc piconets, which are much more common than infrastructure networks. Ad
hoc networks provide easy connection establishment between mobile devices in the same physical area
(e.g., the same room) without the use of any infrastructure devices. A Bluetooth client is simply a device
with a Bluetooth radio and software incorporating the Bluetooth protocol stack and interfaces.

The Bluetooth specification provides separation of duties for performing stack functions between a host
and a host controller. The host is responsible for the higher layer protocols, such as Logical Link Control
and Adaptation Protocol (L2CAP) and Service Discovery Protocol (SDP). The host functions are
performed by a computing device like a laptop or desktop computer. The host controller is responsible
for the lower layers, including the Radio, Baseband, and Link Manager Protocol (LMP). The host
controller functions are performed by an integrated or external (e.g., USB) Bluetooth dongle. The host
and host controller send information to each other using the Host Controller Interface (HCI). In many
cases, the host and host controller functions are integrated into a single device, with Bluetooth headsets
being a prime example.

Figure 2-1 depicts the basic Bluetooth network topology. In a piconet, one device serves as the master,
with all other devices in the piconet acting as slaves. Piconets can scale to include up to seven active
slave devices and up to 255 inactive slave devices.




                                          Figure 2-1. Bluetooth Ad Hoc Topology

The master device controls and establishes the network (including defining the network’s frequency
hopping scheme). Although only one device can serve as the master for each piconet, time division

5
      Having a remote device’s clock information is not needed to make a connection, but it will speed up the connection process.


                                                               2-3
                                                                                             GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



multiplexing (TDM) allows a slave in one piconet to act as the master for another piconet simultaneously,
thus creating a chain of networks. 6 This chain, called a scatternet, allows several devices to be networked
over an extended distance in a dynamic topology that can change during any given session. As a device
moves toward or away from the master device, the topology, and therefore the relationships of the devices
in the immediate network, may change. Figure 2-2 depicts a scatternet that connects three piconets.




                                Figure 2-2. Bluetooth Networks (Multiple Scatternets)

Routing capabilities supported by Bluetooth networks control the changing network topologies of
piconets and scatternets and assist in controlling the flow of data between networked devices. Bluetooth
uses a combination of packet-switching and circuit-switching technologies. The use of packet switching
in Bluetooth allows devices to route multiple packets of information over the same data path. This
method does not consume all the resources of a data path, thereby allowing Bluetooth devices to maintain
data flow throughout a scatternet.



6
    Note that a particular device can only be the master of one piconet at any given time.


                                                              2-4
                                                                                GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



3.    Bluetooth Security Features

This section provides an overview of the security mechanisms included in the Bluetooth specifications to
illustrate their limitations and provide a foundation for some of the security recommendations in Section
4. A high-level example of the scope of the security for the Bluetooth radio path is depicted in Figure 3-
1. In this example, Bluetooth security is provided only between the mobile phone and the laptop
computer, while IEEE 802.11 security protects the wireless local area network link between the laptop
and the IEEE 802.11 AP. However, the communications on the wired network are not protected by
Bluetooth or IEEE 802.11 security capabilities. End-to-end security is not possible without using higher-
layer security solutions in addition to the security features included in the Bluetooth specification and
IEEE 802.11 standards.




                                Figure 3-1. Bluetooth Air-Interface Security

The following are the three basic security services specified in the Bluetooth standard:

 Authentication: verifying the identity of communicating devices. User authentication is not
  provided natively by Bluetooth.
 Confidentiality: preventing information compromise caused by eavesdropping by ensuring that only
  authorized devices can access and view data.
 Authorization: allowing the control of resources by ensuring that a device is authorized to use a
  service before permitting it to do so.
The three security services offered by Bluetooth and details about the modes of security are described
below. Bluetooth does not address other security services such as audit and non-repudiation; if such
services are needed, they must be provided through additional means.




                                                    3-1
                                                                                 GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



3.1   Security Features of Bluetooth Specifications

Cumulatively, the various versions of Bluetooth specifications define four security modes. Each version
of Bluetooth supports some, but not all, of the four modes. Each Bluetooth device must operate in one of
the four modes, which are described below.

Security Mode 1 is non-secure. Security functionality (authentication and encryption) is bypassed,
leaving the device and connections susceptible to attackers. In effect, Bluetooth devices in this mode are
“promiscuous” and do not employ any mechanisms to prevent other Bluetooth-enabled devices from
establishing connections. Security Mode 1 is only supported in v2.0 + EDR (and earlier) devices.

In Security Mode 2, a service level-enforced security mode, security procedures are initiated after LMP
link establishment but before L2CAP channel establishment. L2CAP resides in the data link layer and
provides connection-oriented and connectionless data services to upper layers. For this security mode, a
security manager (as specified in the Bluetooth architecture) controls access to specific services and
devices. The centralized security manager maintains policies for access control and interfaces with other
protocols and device users. Varying security policies and trust levels to restrict access may be defined for
applications with different security requirements operating in parallel. It is possible to grant access to
some services without providing access to other services. In this mode, the notion of authorization—the
process of deciding if a specific device is allowed to have access to a specific service—is introduced. It is
important to note that the authentication and encryption mechanisms used for Security Mode 2 are
implemented at the LMP layer (below L2CAP), just as with Security Mode 3. All Bluetooth devices can
support Security Mode 2; however, v2.1 + EDR devices can only support it for backward compatibility
with v2.0 + EDR (or earlier) devices.

In Security Mode 3, the link level-enforced security mode, a Bluetooth device initiates security
procedures before the physical link is fully established. Bluetooth devices operating in Security Mode 3
mandates authentication and encryption for all connections to and from the device. This mode supports
authentication (unidirectional or mutual) and encryption. The authentication and encryption features are
based on a separate secret link key that is shared by paired devices, once the pairing has been established.
Security Mode 3 is only supported in v2.0 + EDR (or earlier) devices.

Similar to Security Mode 2, Security Mode 4 (introduced in Bluetooth v2.1 + EDR) is a service level
enforced security mode in which security procedures are initiated after link setup. Secure Simple Pairing
uses Elliptic Curve Diffie Hellman (ECDH) techniques for key exchange and link key generation. Device
authentication and encryption algorithms are identical to the algorithms in Bluetooth v2.0 + EDR and
earlier versions. Security requirements for services protected by Security Mode 4 must be classified as
one of the following: authenticated link key required, unauthenticated link key required, or no security
required. Whether or not a link key is authenticated depends on the Secure Simple Pairing association
model used. See Section 3.2.2 for a description of Secure Simple Pairing. Security Mode 4 is mandatory
for communication between v2.1 + EDR devices.

The rest of this section discusses specific Bluetooth security components in more detail: link key
generation, authentication, confidentiality, and other Bluetooth security mechanisms.

3.2   Link Key Generation

As mentioned in Section 3.1, there are two methods in which link key generation is performed for
Bluetooth. Security Modes 2 and 3 use one method, while Security Mode 4 uses another. Both methods
are described below.




                                                    3-2
                                                                                GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



3.2.1   Security Modes 2 and 3

For Bluetooth v2.0 + EDR (and earlier), operating in Security Mode 2 or 3, two associated devices
simultaneously derive link keys during the initialization phase when users enter an identical PIN into one
or both devices, depending on the configuration and device type. The PIN entry, device association, and
key derivation are depicted conceptually in Figure 3-2. Note that if the PIN is less than 16 bytes, the
BD_ADDR is used to supplement the PIN value used to generate the initialization key. The Ex boxes
represent encryption algorithms that are used during the Bluetooth device association and key derivation
processes. More details on the Bluetooth authentication and encryption procedures are outlined in
Sections 3.4 and 3.5, respectively.




                         Figure 3-2. Link Key Generation from PIN (v2.0 & earlier)



                                                   3-3
                                                                                             GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



After initialization is complete, devices automatically and transparently authenticate and initiate the
encryption procedure to secure the wireless link, if encryption is enabled. The PIN code used in
Bluetooth devices can vary between one and 16 bytes. The typical four-digit PIN may be sufficient for
low-risk situations; a longer PIN should be used for devices that require a higher level of security. 7

3.2.2   Security Mode 4

Secure Simple Pairing (SSP) was introduced in Bluetooth v2.1 + EDR for use with Security Mode 4. SSP
simplifies the pairing process by providing a number of association models that are flexible in terms of
device input capability. SSP also improves security through the addition of ECDH public key
cryptography for protection against passive eavesdropping and man-in-the-middle attacks (MITM) during
pairing.

The four association models offered in SSP are as follows: 8

 Numeric Comparison was designed for the situation where both Bluetooth devices are capable of
  displaying a six-digit number and allowing a user to enter a “yes” or “no” response. During pairing, a
  user is shown a six-digit number on each display and provides a “yes” response on each device if the
  numbers match. Otherwise, the user responds “no” and pairing will fail. A key difference between
  this operation and the use of PINs in legacy pairing is that the displayed number is not used as input
  to subsequent link key generation. An attacker who is able to view (or otherwise capture) the
  displayed value could not use it to determine the resulting link or encryption key.
 Passkey Entry was designed for the situation where one Bluetooth device has input capability (e.g.,
  Bluetooth-enabled keyboard), while the other device has a display but no input capability. In this
  model, the device with only a display shows a six-digit number that the user then enters on the device
  with input capability. As with the Numeric Comparison model, the six-digit number used in this
  transaction is not incorporated into link key generation and hence is of no value to an attacker.
 Just Works was designed for the situation where one (or both) of the pairing devices has neither a
  display nor a keyboard for entering digits (e.g., Bluetooth-enabled headset). It performs
  Authentication Stage 1 (see Figure 3-3 below) in the same manner as the Numeric Comparison
  model, except that a display is not available. The user is required to accept a connection without
  verifying the calculated value on both devices, so MITM protection is not provided.
 Out of Band (OOB) was designed for devices that support a wireless technology other than
  Bluetooth (e.g., Near Field Communication [NFC]) for the purposes of device discovery and
  cryptographic value exchange. In the case of NFC, the OOB model allows devices to pair by simply
  “tapping” one device against the other, followed by the user accepting the pairing via a single button
  push. It is important to note that the chosen OOB wireless technology should be configured to
  mitigate eavesdropping and MITM attacks to keep the pairing process as secure as possible.
Security Mode 4 requires Bluetooth services to mandate an authenticated link key, an unauthenticated
link key, or no security at all. Of the association models described above, all but the Just Works model
provide authenticated link keys.



7
    The Bluetooth Security White Paper from the Bluetooth Special Interest Group is available at
    http://www.bluetooth.com/NR/rdonlyres/E870794C-2788-49BF-96D3-C9578E0AE21D/0/security_whitepaper_v1.pdf.
8
    This information is derived from “Simple Pairing Whitepaper”, written by the Bluetooth Special Interest Group, August
    2006. The paper is available at http://bluetooth.com/NR/rdonlyres/0A0B3F36-D15F-4470-85A6-
    F2CCFA26F70F/0/SimplePairing_WP_V10r00.pdf.


                                                            3-4
                                                                                  GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



Figure 3-3 shows how the link key is established for SSP. Note how this technique uses ECDH
public/private key pairs rather than generating a symmetric key via a PIN.




                        Figure 3-3. Link Key Establishment for Secure Simple Pairing



3.3   Authentication

The Bluetooth device authentication procedure is in the form of a challenge-response scheme. Each
device interacting in an authentication procedure is referred to as either the claimant or the verifier. The
claimant is the device attempting to prove its identity, and the verifier is the device validating the identity
of the claimant. The challenge-response protocol validates devices by verifying the knowledge of a secret
key—the Bluetooth link key. The challenge-response verification scheme is depicted conceptually in
Figure 3-4.




                                                     3-5
                                                                                          GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY




                                       Figure 3-4. Bluetooth Authentication

The steps in the authentication process are as follows:

 Step 1. The verifier transmits a 128-bit random challenge (AU_RAND) to the claimant.
 Step 2. The claimant uses the E1 algorithm 9 to compute an authentication response using his unique
  48-bit Bluetooth device address (BD_ADDR), the link key, and AU_RAND as inputs. The verifier
  performs the same computation. Only the 32 most significant bits of the E1 output are used for
  authentication purposes. The remaining 96 bits of the 128-bit output are known as the Authenticated
  Ciphering Offset (ACO) value, which will be used later to create the Bluetooth encryption key.
 Step 3. The claimant returns the most significant 32 bits of the E1 output as the computed response,
  SRES, to the verifier.
 Step 4. The verifier compares the SRES from the claimant with the value that it computed.
 Step 5. If the two 32-bit values are equal, the authentication is considered successful. If the two 32-
  bit values are not equal, the authentication has failed.
Performing these steps once accomplishes one-way authentication. The Bluetooth standard allows both
one-way and mutual authentication to be performed. For mutual authentication, the above process is
repeated with the verifier and claimant switching roles.


9
    The E1 authentication function is based on the SAFER+ algorithm. SAFER stands for Secure And Fast Encryption Routine.
    The SAFER algorithms are iterated block ciphers (IBC). In an IBC, the same cryptographic function is applied for a
    specified number of rounds.


                                                          3-6
                                                                                            GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



If authentication fails, a Bluetooth device waits an interval of time before a new attempt is made. This
time interval increases exponentially to prevent an adversary from attempting to gain access by defeating
the authentication scheme through trial-and-error with different keys. It is important to note that this
suspend technique does not provide security against sophisticated adversaries performing offline attacks
to exhaustively search PINs.

Note that the security associated with authentication is solely based on the secrecy of the link key. While
the Bluetooth device addresses and random challenge value are considered public parameters, the link key
is not. The link key is derived during pairing and is never disclosed outside the Bluetooth device or
transmitted over wireless links. The link key is passed in the clear from the host to the host controller
(e.g., PC to USB dongle) if the host is used for key storage. The random challenge, which is a public
parameter associated with the authentication process, is designed to be different for every transaction.
The random number is derived from a pseudo-random process within the Bluetooth device. The
cryptographic response is public as well and part of the encryption establishment process.

3.4     Confidentiality

In addition to the Security Modes, Bluetooth provides a separate confidentiality service to thwart
eavesdropping attempts on the payloads of the packets exchanged between Bluetooth devices. Bluetooth
has three Encryption Modes, but only two of them actually provide confidentiality. The modes are as
follows:

 Encryption Mode 1—No encryption is performed on any traffic.
 Encryption Mode 2—Individually addressed traffic is encrypted using encryption keys based on
  individual link keys; broadcast traffic is not encrypted.
 Encryption Mode 3—All traffic is encrypted using an encryption key based on the master link key.
Encryption Modes 2 and 3 use the same encryption mechanism.

As shown in Figure 3-5, the encryption key provided to the encryption algorithm is produced using an
internal key generator (KG). The KG produces stream cipher keys based on the 128-bit link key, which is
a secret that is held in the Bluetooth devices, a 128-bit random number (EN_RAND), and the 96-bit ACO
value. The ACO is produced during the authentication procedure, as shown in Figure 3-4.

The Bluetooth encryption procedure is based on a stream cipher, E0. A key stream output is exclusive-
OR-ed with the payload bits and sent to the receiving device. This key stream is produced using a
cryptographic algorithm based on linear feedback shift registers (LFSR). 10 The encryption function takes
the following as inputs: the master identity (BD_ADDR), the 128-bit random number (EN_RAND), a slot
number, and an encryption key, which when combined initialize the LFSRs before the transmission of
each packet, if encryption is enabled. The slot number used in the stream cipher changes with each
packet; the ciphering engine is also reinitialized with each packet while the other variables remain static.




10
      LFSRs are used in coding (error control coding) theory and cryptography. LFSR-based key stream generators (KSG),
      composed of exclusive-OR gates and shift registers, are common in stream ciphers and are very fast in hardware.


                                                            3-7
                                                                                            GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY




                                     Figure 3-5. Bluetooth Encryption Procedure

The encryption key (KC) is generated from the current link key and may vary from eight bits to 128 bits.
The key size negotiation process occurs between the master and slave devices. During negotiation, a
master device makes a key size suggestion for the slave. The initial key size suggested by the master is
programmed into the host controller by the manufacturer and is not always 128-bit. In product
implementations, a “minimum acceptable” key size parameter can be set to prevent a malicious user from
driving the key size down to the minimum of eight bits, making the link less secure.

It is important to note that E0 is not a Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) approved
algorithm and has come under scrutiny recently in terms of algorithmic strength. 11 A recently published
theoretical known-plaintext attack has been discovered that can recover the encryption key in 238
computations, as compared to a brute force attack, which would require the testing of 2128 possible keys.
If communications require FIPS-approved cryptographic protection (e.g., sensitive information

11
     Y. Lu, W. Meier, and S. Vaudenay. “The Conditional Correlation Attack: A Practical Attack on Bluetooth Encryption”.
     http://lasecwww.epfl.ch/pub/lasec/doc/LMV05.pdf




                                                            3-8
                                                                               GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



transmitted by Federal agencies), this can be achieved by employing application-level FIPS-approved
encryption over the native Bluetooth encryption.

3.5   Trust Levels, Service Levels, and Authorization

In addition to the four security modes, Bluetooth allows two levels of trust and three levels of service
security. The two Bluetooth levels of trust are trusted and untrusted. A trusted device has a fixed
relationship with another device and has full access to all services. An untrusted device does not have an
established relationship with another Bluetooth device, which results in the untrusted device receiving
restricted access to services. Three levels of security have been defined for Bluetooth services. These
levels allow the requirements for authorization, authentication, and encryption to be configured and
altered independently. The service security levels are as follows:

 Service Level 1—Requires authorization and authentication. Automatic access is granted only to
  trusted devices; untrusted devices need manual authorization.
 Service Level 2—Requires authentication only; authorization is not necessary. Access to an
  application is allowed only after an authentication procedure.
 Service Level 3—Open to all devices, with no authentication required. Access is granted
  automatically.
The Bluetooth architecture allows for defining security policies that can set trust relationships in such a
way that even trusted devices can get access only to specific services. It is important to understand that
although Bluetooth core protocols can only authenticate devices and not users, it is possible to initiate
user-based authentication in an alternative manner. The Bluetooth security architecture (through the
security manager) allows applications to enforce more granular security policies. The link layer, at which
Bluetooth-specific security controls operate, is transparent to the security controls imposed by the
application layers. Thus, it is possible to enforce user-based authentication and fine-grained access
control within the Bluetooth security framework through the application layers.




                                                    3-9
                                                                                      GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



4.        Bluetooth Vulnerabilities, Threats, and Countermeasures

This section describes vulnerabilities in Bluetooth technologies and threats against those vulnerabilities.
Based on the common vulnerabilities and threats, as well as the Bluetooth security features described in
Section 3, this section also makes recommendations for possible countermeasures that can be used to
improve Bluetooth security.

Organizations that are planning countermeasures for Bluetooth technologies that use the v2.1 + EDR
specification should carefully consider its security implications. The specification was released in mid-
2007, and as of mid-2008, few products that support the specification are yet available. As the
specification becomes more widely adopted, it is likely that additional vulnerabilities will be discovered
and additional recommendations needed for securing v2.1 technologies effectively. Organizations
planning on deploying v2.1 technologies should monitor developments involving new vulnerabilities and
threats and additional security control recommendations.

4.1       Bluetooth Vulnerabilities

Table 4-1 below provides an overview of some of the known security vulnerabilities with Bluetooth. The
Bluetooth security checklist in Section 4.4 addresses these vulnerabilities.

                       Table 4-1. Key Problems with Existing (Native) Bluetooth Security

                     Security Issue or Vulnerability                                Remarks
Versions Before Bluetooth v1.2
      1       Unit key is reusable and becomes public         A unit key should be used as input to generate a
              once used.                                      random key. A key set should be used instead of only
                                                              one unit key.
      2       Unit key sharing can lead to eavesdropping.     A corrupt user may be able to compromise the
                                                              security between two other users if the corrupt user
                                                              has communicated with either of the other two users.
                                                              This is because the link key (unit key), derived from
                                                              shared information, has been disclosed.
Versions Before Bluetooth v2.1
      3       Short PINs are allowed.                         Weak PINs, which are used for the generation of link
                                                              and encryption keys, can be easily guessed. People
                                                              have a tendency to select short PINs.
      4       PIN management is lacking.                      Establishing use of adequate PINs in an enterprise
                                                              setting with many users may be difficult. Scalability
                                                              problems frequently yield security problems.
      5       Encryption keystream repeats after 23.3         Per Figure 3-5, the encryption keystream is
              hours of use.                                   dependent on the link key, EN_RAND, Master
                                                              BD_ADDR, and Clock. Only the Master’s clock will
                                                              change during a particular encrypted connection. If a
                                                              connection lasts more than 23.3 hours, the clock
                                                              value will begin to repeat, hence generating an
                                                              identical keystream to that used earlier in the
                                                              connection.
All Versions
      6       Link keys are stored improperly.                Link keys can be read or modified by an attacker if
                                                              they are not securely stored and protected via access
                                                              controls.




                                                        4-1
                                                                                                 GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



                       Security Issue or Vulnerability                                        Remarks
      7       Attempts for authentication are repeated.               A limiting feature needs to be incorporated in the
                                                                      specification to prevent unlimited requests. The
                                                                      Bluetooth specification currently requires a time-out
                                                                      period between repeated attempts that will increase
                                                                      exponentially.
      8       Strength of the challenge-response pseudo-              The Random Number Generator (RNG) may produce
              random generator is not known.                          static number or periodic numbers that may reduce
                                                                      the effectiveness of the authentication scheme.
      9       Encryption key length is negotiable.                    The specification allows devices to negotiate
                                                                      encryption keys as small as one byte. A more robust
                                                                      encryption key generation procedure needs to be
                                                                      incorporated in the specification.
     10       The master key is shared.                               A better broadcast keying scheme needs to be
                                                                      incorporated into the specification.
     11       No user authentication exists.                          Only device authentication is provided by the
                                                                      specification. Application-level security, including
                                                                      user authentication, can be added via overlay by the
                                                                      application developer.
     12       The E0 stream cipher algorithm used for                 More robust encryption needs to be incorporated in
              Bluetooth encryption is weak.                           the specification.
     13       Privacy may be compromised if the                       Once the BD_ADDR is associated with a particular
              Bluetooth device address (BD_ADDR) is                   user, that user’s activities could be logged, resulting
              captured and associated with a particular               in a loss of privacy.
              user.
     14       Device authentication is simple shared-key              One-way-only challenge-response authentication is
              challenge-response.                                     subject to MITM attacks. Bluetooth provides for
                                                                      mutual authentication, which should be used to
                                                                      provide verification that users and the network are
                                                                      legitimate.
     15       End-to-end security is not performed.                   Only individual links are encrypted and authenticated.
                                                                      Data is decrypted at intermediate points. End-to-end
                                                                      security on top of the Bluetooth stack can be provided
                                                                      by use of additional security controls.
     16       Security services are limited.                          Audit, nonrepudiation, and other services are not part
                                                                      of the standard. If needed, these services can be
                                                                      incorporated in an overlay fashion by the application
                                                                      developer.
     17       Discoverable and/or connectable devices                 Any device that must go into discoverable or
              are prone to attack.                                    connectable mode to pair should only do so for a
                                                                      minimal amount of time. A device should never be in
                                                                      discoverable or connectable mode all the time.

4.2       Bluetooth Threats

Bluetooth offers several benefits and advantages, but the benefits of Bluetooth are not provided without
risk. Bluetooth technology and associated devices are susceptible to general wireless networking threats,
such as denial of service attacks, eavesdropping, man-in-the-middle attacks, message modification, and
resource misappropriation, 12 and are also threatened by more specific Bluetooth-related attacks, such as
the following:


12
      Additional information on general wireless security threats is available in Section 3 of NIST SP 800-48 Revision 1, Guide to
      Securing Legacy IEEE 802.11 Wireless Networks (http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-48-rev1/SP800-48r1.pdf).


                                                               4-2
                                                                                              GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



 Bluesnarfing. Bluesnarfing 13 enables attackers to gain access to a Bluetooth-enabled device by
  exploiting a firmware flaw in older devices. This attack forces a connection to a Bluetooth device,
  allowing access to data stored on the device and even the device’s international mobile equipment
  identity (IMEI). The IMEI is a unique identifier for each device that an attacker could potentially use
  to route all incoming calls from the user’s device to the attacker’s device.
 Bluejacking. Bluejacking is an attack conducted on Bluetooth-enabled mobile devices, such as
  cellular telephones, smart phones, and PDAs. Bluejacking is initiated by an attacker sending
  unsolicited messages to a user of a Bluetooth-enabled device. The actual messages do not cause harm
  to the user’s device, but they are used to entice the user to respond in some fashion or add the new
  contact to the device’s address book. This message-sending attack resembles spam and phishing
  attacks conducted against email users. Bluejacking can cause harm when a user initiates a response to
  a bluejacking message that is sent with a harmful intent.
 Bluebugging. Bluebugging 14 exploits a security flaw in the firmware of some older Bluetooth
  devices to gain access to the device and its commands. This attack uses the commands of the device
  without informing the user, allowing the attacker to access data, place telephone calls, eavesdrop on
  telephone calls, send messages, and exploit other services or features offered by the device.
 Car Whisperer. Car Whisperer 15 is a software tool developed by European security researchers that
  exploits a key implementation issue in hands-free Bluetooth car kits installed in automobiles. The car
  whisperer software allows an attacker to send to or receive audio from the car kit. An attacker could
  transmit audio to the car’s speakers or receive audio (eavesdrop) from the microphone in the car.
 Denial of Service. Bluetooth is susceptible to DoS attacks. Impacts include making a device’s
  Bluetooth interface unusable and draining the mobile device’s battery. These types of attacks are not
  significant and, due to the proximity required for Bluetooth use, can usually be easily averted by
  simply walking away.
 Fuzzing Attacks. Bluetooth fuzzing attacks consist of sending malformed or otherwise non-standard
  data to a device’s Bluetooth radio and observing how the device reacts. When a device’s response is
  slowed or stopped by these attacks, this indicates that a serious vulnerability potentially exists in the
  protocol stack.
4.3     Risk Mitigation and Countermeasures

Organizations should mitigate risks to their Bluetooth implementations by applying countermeasures to
address specific threats and vulnerabilities. Some of these countermeasures cannot be achieved through
security features built into the Bluetooth specifications. The countermeasures recommended in the
checklists in Section 4.4 do not guarantee a secure Bluetooth environment and cannot prevent all
adversary penetrations. Also, security comes at a cost—financial expenses related to security equipment,
inconvenience, maintenance, and operation. Each organization needs to evaluate the acceptable level of
risk based on numerous factors, which will affect the level of security implemented by that organization.
To be effective, Bluetooth security should be incorporated throughout the entire life cycle of Bluetooth
solutions. 16




13
      http://trifinite.org/trifinite_stuff_bluesnarf.html
14
      http://trifinite.org/trifinite_stuff_bluebug.html
15
      http://trifinite.org/trifinite_stuff_carwhisperer.html
16
      For more information about technology life cycles, see NIST SP 800-64, Security Considerations in the Information System
      Development Life Cycle (http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html).


                                                              4-3
                                                                                                GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



FIPS Publication (PUB) 199 establishes three security categories—low, moderate, and high—based on
the potential impact of a security breach involving a particular system. NIST SP 800-53 provides
recommendations for minimum management, operational, and technical security controls for information
systems based on the FIPS PUB 199 impact categories. 17 The recommendations in NIST SP 800-53
should be helpful to organizations in identifying controls that are needed to protect Bluetooth
implementations in general, which should be used in addition to the specific recommendations for
Bluetooth implementations listed in this document.

The first line of defense is to provide an adequate level of knowledge and understanding for those who
will deal with Bluetooth-enabled devices. Organizations using Bluetooth technology should establish and
document security policies that address the use of Bluetooth-enabled devices and users’ responsibilities.
Organizations should include awareness-based education to support staff understanding and knowledge of
Bluetooth. Policy documents should include a list of approved uses for Bluetooth, and the type of
information that may be transferred over Bluetooth networks. The security policy should also specify a
proper password usage scheme. When feasible, a centralized security policy management approach
should be used in coordination with an endpoint security product installed on the Bluetooth devices to
ensure that the policy is locally enforced.

The general nature and mobility of Bluetooth-enabled devices increases the difficulty of employing
traditional security measures. Nevertheless, a number of countermeasures can be enacted to secure
Bluetooth devices and communications, ranging from distance and power output to general operation
practices. Several countermeasures that could be employed are provided in the checklists in Section 4.4.

4.4     Bluetooth Security Checklists

This section provides Bluetooth security checklists. For each recommendation or guideline in a checklist,
a justification column lists areas of concern for Bluetooth devices, the security threats and vulnerabilities
associated with those areas, risk mitigations for securing the devices from these threats, and
vulnerabilities. In addition, for each recommendation and justification, a checklist with three columns is
provided. The first column, the Recommended Practice column, if checked, means that this entry
represents a recommendation for all organizations. The second column, the Should Consider column, if
checked, means that the entry’s recommendation should be considered carefully by an organization for
one or more of the following reasons. First, implementing the recommendation may provide a higher
level of security for the wireless environment by offering some additional protection. Second, the
recommendation supports a defense-in-depth strategy. Third, it may have significant performance,
operational, or cost impacts. In summary, if the Should Consider column is checked, organizations
should carefully consider the option and weigh the costs versus the benefits. The last column, Status, is
intentionally left blank to allow organization representatives to use this table as a true checklist. For
instance, an individual performing a wireless security audit in a Bluetooth environment can quickly check
off each recommendation for the organization, asking, “Have I done this?”

Table 4-2 provides a Bluetooth security checklist with guidelines and recommendations for creating and
maintaining secure Bluetooth piconets. Additional checklists for Bluetooth headsets and smart card
readers are located later in this section.




17
      FIPS PUB 199, Standards for Security Categorization of Federal Information and Information Systems, is available at
      http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips199/FIPS-PUB-199-final.pdf. NIST SP 800-53 Revision 2, Recommended Security
      Controls for Federal Information Systems, is available at http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-53-Rev2/sp800-53-
      rev2-final.pdf.


                                                              4-4
                                                                                         GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY


                                Table 4-2. Bluetooth Piconet Security Checklist

                                                                                                 Checklist
                                             Security Need, Requirement, or           Recom-
       Security Recommendation                                                                     Should
                                                      Justification                   mended                 Status
                                                                                                  Consider
                                                                                      Practice
                                           Management Recommendations
     Develop an organizational
                                            A security policy is the foundation for
 1   wireless security policy that
                                            all other countermeasures.
     addresses Bluetooth technology.
     Ensure that Bluetooth users on
     the network are made aware of          A security awareness program helps
 2   their security-related                 users to follow security practices
     responsibilities regarding             that help prevent security incidents.
     Bluetooth use.
     Perform comprehensive security         Bluetooth products should support
     assessments at regular intervals       upgrade and patching of firmware to
 3   to fully understand the                be able to take advantage of
     organization’s Bluetooth security      Bluetooth security enhancements
     posture.                               and fixes.
                                            Bluetooth-enabled devices can
                                            contain various networking
                                            technologies and interfaces allowing
     Ensure that wireless devices and       connections to local and wide area
     networks involving Bluetooth           networks. An organization must
 4   technology are fully understood        understand the overall connectivity
     from an architecture perspective       of each device to identify possible
     and documented accordingly.            risks and vulnerabilities. These risks
                                            and vulnerabilities can then be
                                            addressed in the wireless security
                                            policy.
                                            The organization and its employees
     Provide users with a list of           should be responsible for its
     precautionary measures they            wireless technology components
 5   should take to better protect          because theft of those components
     handheld Bluetooth devices from        could lead to malicious activities
     theft.                                 against the organization’s
                                            information system resource.
                                            A complete inventory list of
     Maintain a complete inventory of       Bluetooth-enabled wireless devices
     all Bluetooth-enabled wireless         can be referenced when conducting
 6
     devices and addresses                  an audit that searches for
     (BD_ADDRs).                            unauthorized use of wireless
                                            technologies.
Technical Recommendations
                                            Because default settings are
                                            generally not secure, a careful
     Change the default settings of
                                            review of those settings should be
 7   the Bluetooth device to reflect
                                            performed to ensure that they
     the organization’s security policy.
                                            comply with the company security
                                            policy.




                                                          4-5
                                                                                                 GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



                                                                                                          Checklist
                                                    Security Need, Requirement, or           Recom-
              Security Recommendation                                                                       Should
                                                             Justification                   mended                       Status
                                                                                                           Consider
                                                                                             Practice
                                                  Setting Bluetooth devices to the
           Set Bluetooth devices to the           lowest necessary and sufficient
           lowest necessary and sufficient        power level ensures a secure range
     8     power level so that transmissions      of access to authorized users. The
           remain within the secure               use of Class 1 devices should be
           perimeter of the organization.         avoided due to their extended range
                                                  (approximately 100 meters).
                                                  PIN codes should be random so that
                                                  they cannot be easily guessed by
                                                  malicious users. Longer PIN codes
           Choose PIN codes that are              are more resistant to brute force
           sufficiently random and long.          attacks. For Bluetooth v2.0 (or
     9
           Avoid static and weak PINs, such       earlier) devices, an eight-character
           as all zeroes.                         alphanumeric PIN should be used, if
                                                  possible. The use of a fixed PIN is
                                                  not acceptable for sensitive
                                                  Bluetooth connections.
                                                  The use of shared unit keys can
           Ensure that link keys are based
                                                  lead to successful MITM attacks.
 10        on combination keys rather than
                                                  The use of unit keys for security was
           unit keys.
                                                  deprecated in Bluetooth v1.2.
                                                  The “Just Works” association model
                                                  does not provide MITM protection.
           For v2.1 devices using Secure          Devices that only support Just
           Simple Pairing, avoid using the        Works should not be procured if
 11        “Just Works” model.                    similarly qualified devices that
                                                  support one of the other association
                                                  models (i.e., Numeric Comparison,
                                                  Out Of Band, or Passkey Entry) are
                                                  available.
                                                  Many Bluetooth stacks are designed
                                                  to support multiple profiles and
           Service and profile lockdown of        associated services. The Bluetooth
 12        device Bluetooth stacks should         stack on a device should be locked
           be performed. 18                       down to ensure only approved
                                                  profiles and services are available
                                                  for use.
                                                  Bluetooth interfaces should be
                                                  configured as non-discoverable,
                                                  which prevents visibility to other
           Bluetooth devices should be            Bluetooth devices except when
           configured by default as, and          discovery is specifically needed.
 13
           remain, undiscoverable except          Also, the default self-identifying or
           as needed for pairing.                 discoverable names provided on
                                                  Bluetooth devices should be
                                                  changed to anonymous,
                                                  unidentifiable names.




18
         Derived from requirement 6.0 in DoD’s Bluetooth Smart Card Reader Security Requirements Matrix (01 June 2007),
         available at http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/checklist/DoD-Bluetooth-Smart-Card-Reader-Security-Requirements-Matrix.pdf


                                                                 4-6
                                                                                       GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



                                                                                               Checklist
                                            Security Need, Requirement, or          Recom-
       Security Recommendation                                                                   Should
                                                     Justification                  mended                 Status
                                                                                                Consider
                                                                                    Practice
                                           Link encryption should be used to
     Invoke link encryption for all
                                           secure all data transmissions during
     Bluetooth connections regardless
14                                         a Bluetooth connection, otherwise
     of how needless encryption may
                                           transmitted data is vulnerable to
     seem (i.e., no Security Mode 1).
                                           eavesdropping.
     If multi-hop wireless
                                           Every link should be secured
     communication is being utilized,
                                           because one unsecured link results
15   ensure that encryption is enabled
                                           in compromising the entire
     on every link in the
                                           communication chain.
     communication chain.
     Ensure device mutual                  Mutual authentication is required to
16   authentication is performed for all   provide verification that all devices
     accesses.                             on the network are legitimate.
                                           Broadcast transmissions secured by
     Enable encryption for all             link encryption provide a layer of
17   broadcast transmissions               security that protects these
     (Encryption Mode 3).                  transmissions from user interception
                                           for malicious purposes.
                                           Using maximum allowable key sizes
     Configure encryption key sizes to
18                                         provides protection from brute force
     the maximum allowable.
                                           attacks.
                                           Establishing minimum key sizes
                                           ensures that all keys are long
     Establish a “minimum key size”
19                                         enough to be resistant to brute force
     for any key negotiation process.
                                           attacks. Preferably, keys should be
                                           at least 128 bits long.
                                           Bluetooth devices can access link
                                           keys from memory and automatically
                                           connect with previously paired
                                           devices. Incorporating application-
                                           level software that implements
                                           authentication and encryption will
     Use application-level (on top of      add an extra layer of security.
     the Bluetooth stack)                  Passwords and other authentication
20
     authentication and encryption for     mechanisms, such as biometrics
     sensitive data communication.         and smart cards, can be used to
                                           provide user authentication for
                                           Bluetooth devices. Employing
                                           higher layer encryption (particularly
                                           FIPS 140-2 validated) over the
                                           native encryption will further protect
                                           the data in transit.
     Deploy user authentication such       Implementing strong authentication
     as biometrics, smart cards, two-      mechanisms can minimize the
21
     factor authentication, or public      vulnerabilities associated with
     key infrastructure (PKI).             passwords and PINs.




                                                         4-7
                                                                                              GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



                                                                                                       Checklist
                                                 Security Need, Requirement, or           Recom-
           Security Recommendation                                                                       Should
                                                          Justification                   mended                       Status
                                                                                                        Consider
                                                                                          Practice
Operational Recommendations
                                               Bluetooth capabilities should be
                                               disabled on all Bluetooth devices,
                                               except when the user explicitly
        Ensure that Bluetooth devices
                                               enables Bluetooth to establish a
 22     are turned off when they are not
                                               connection. Shutting down
        used.
                                               Bluetooth devices when not in use
                                               minimizes exposure to potential
                                               malicious activities.
        Perform pairing as infrequently
        as possible, ideally in a secure       Pairing is a vital security function
        area where attackers cannot            and requires that users maintain a
        realistically observe the passkey      security awareness of possible
        entry and intercept Bluetooth          eavesdroppers. If an attacker can
        pairing messages. (Note: A             capture the transmitted frames
        “secure area” is defined as a          associated with pairing, determining
        non-public area that is indoors        the link key is straightforward for
 23
        away from windows in locations         pre-v.2.1 devices (security is solely
        with physical access controls.)        dependent on PIN entropy and
        Users should not respond to any        length). This is also recommended
        messages requesting a PIN,             for v2.1 devices, although similar
        unless the user has initiated a        attacks against Secure Simple
        pairing and is certain the PIN         Pairing have not yet been
        request is being sent by one of        documented.
        the user’s devices. 19
                                               Security Mode 3 provides link-level
                                               security prior to link establishment,
                                               while Security Modes 2 and 4 allow
        A service-level security mode
                                               link-level connections before any
        (i.e., Security Mode 2 or 4)
                                               authentication or encryption is
 24     should only be used in a
                                               established. It is highly
        controlled and well-understood
                                               recommended that devices use
        environment.
                                               Security Mode 3. (However, note
                                               that v2.1 devices cannot use
                                               Security Mode 3.)
                                               Authenticating users to a portable
        Ensure that portable devices with
                                               Bluetooth device is a good security
        Bluetooth interfaces are
                                               practice in the event the device is
 25     configured with a password to
                                               lost or stolen, which provides a layer
        prevent unauthorized access if
                                               of protection for an organization’s
        lost or stolen.
                                               Bluetooth network.
        In the event a Bluetooth device is
        lost or stolen, users should           This will prevent an attacker from
        immediately unpair the missing         using the lost or stolen device to
 26
        device from all other Bluetooth        access another Bluetooth device
        devices with which it was              owned by the user(s).
        previously paired.




19
      Derived from requirement 2.2 in DoD’s Bluetooth Smart Card Reader Security Requirements Matrix (01 June 2007),
      available at http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/checklist/DoD-Bluetooth-Smart-Card-Reader-Security-Requirements-Matrix.pdf


                                                              4-8
                                                                                              GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



                                                                                                       Checklist
                                                 Security Need, Requirement, or           Recom-
           Security Recommendation                                                                       Should
                                                          Justification                   mended                    Status
                                                                                                        Consider
                                                                                          Practice
                                               Antivirus software should be
                                               installed on frequently targeted
                                               Bluetooth-enabled hosts to ensure
        Install antivirus software on          that known malware is not
 27     Bluetooth-enabled hosts that are       introduced to the Bluetooth network.
        frequently targeted by malware.        Organizations may also choose to
                                               deploy antivirus software on less-
                                               often targeted Bluetooth-enabled
                                               hosts.
                                               Newly discovered security
                                               vulnerabilities of vendor products
        Fully test and deploy Bluetooth        should be patched to prevent
 28     software patches and upgrades          malicious and inadvertent exploits.
        regularly.                             Patches should be fully tested
                                               before implementation to ensure that
                                               they work.
        Users should not accept                With the increase in the number of
        transmissions of any kind from         Bluetooth-enabled devices, it is
        unknown or suspicious devices.         important that users only establish
 29
        These types of transmissions           connections with other trusted
        include messages, files, and           devices and only accept content
        images.                                from these trusted devices
                                               To ensure a successful deployment,
                                               an organization should fully
        Fully understand the impacts of
                                               understand the technical, security,
 30     deploying any security feature or
                                               operational, and personnel
        product prior to deployment.
                                               requirements prior to
                                               implementation.
        Designate an individual to track
                                               An appointed individual designated
        the progress of Bluetooth
                                               to track the latest technology
        security products and standards
                                               enhancements, standards (perhaps
 31     (perhaps via the Bluetooth SIG)
                                               via Bluetooth SIG), and risks will
        and the threats and
                                               help to ensure the continued secure
        vulnerabilities with the
                                               use of Bluetooth.
        technology.


Table 4-3 provides guidelines and recommendations on Bluetooth headsets based on the Department of
Defense’s (DoD) Bluetooth Headset Security Requirements Matrix (Version 2.0, 07 April 2008) 20 . These
recommendations are only intended for situations where the organization is concerned about threats
within physical range of the Bluetooth headset usage. Note that most commercially available Bluetooth
headsets, handsets, and hands-free devices cannot be configured to meet the recommendations in Table 4-
3. Most of those devices do not provide encryption and often use a four-digit PIN with a default value
like “0000” that cannot be changed.




20
      http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/checklist/dod_bluetooth_headset_security_requirements_matrix_v2-0_7april2008.pdf


                                                              4-9
                                                                                    GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY


                              Table 4-3. Bluetooth Headset Security Checklist

                                                                                            Checklist
                                         Security Need, Requirement, or          Recom-
      Security Recommendation                                                                 Should
                                                  Justification                  mended                 Status
                                                                                             Consider
                                                                                 Practice
                                        The Bluetooth 1.2 specification
                                        deprecated the use of unit keys for
                                        link key generation. It also included
                                        enhancements such as adaptive
    Bluetooth v1.2 or later should be   frequency hopping (AFH) which
1
    used.                               improved resistance to radio
                                        frequency interference in the
                                        crowded 2.4 GHz band (which is
                                        used by IEEE 802.11b/g and other
                                        protocols).
                                        Bluetooth Class 1 radios provide
                                        100mW of power with an
    Bluetooth radios should be Class
2                                       approximate range of 100 meters,
    2 or Class 3.
                                        which facilitates discovery and
                                        eavesdropping by attackers.
                                        For pre-v2.1 devices, this is
                                        essential to prevent link key cracking
                                        if pairing messages have been
                                        successfully eavesdropped by an
                                        attacker.
    Bluetooth pairing passkeys          Note that v2.1 devices using the
    should be at least eight decimal    Numerical Comparison or Passkey
3                                       Entry association models will always
    digits in length and generated
    randomly for each pairing.          use a 6-digit passkey per the
                                        Bluetooth specification. This is
                                        currently deemed adequate since
                                        v2.1 passkeys used during Secure
                                        Simple Pairing—by design—cannot
                                        be used to derive the associated link
                                        key.
                                        Key establishment is a vital security
                                        function and requires that users
    Perform pairing as infrequently     maintain a security awareness of
    as possible, ideally in a secure    possible eavesdroppers. If an
    area where attackers cannot         attacker can capture the transmitted
    realistically observe the passkey   frames associated with pairing,
    entry and intercept Bluetooth       determining the link key is
4
    pairing messages. (Note: A          straightforward for pre-v.2.1 devices
    “secure area” is defined as a       (security is solely dependent on PIN
    non-public area that is indoors     entropy and length). This is also
    away from windows in locations      recommended for v2.1 devices,
    with physical access controls.)     although similar attacks against
                                        Secure Simple Pairing have not yet
                                        been documented.




                                                     4-10
                                                                                      GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



                                                                                              Checklist
                                            Security Need, Requirement, or         Recom-
      Security Recommendation                                                                   Should
                                                     Justification                 mended                 Status
                                                                                               Consider
                                                                                   Practice
    The Bluetooth headset/audio
    gateway device should remain           While a Bluetooth device is in
    undiscoverable to other                discoverable mode, any inquiring
    Bluetooth devices at all times         device within range can capture
5   other than the initial pairing         important connection information
    process. It should only support        including device address and clock,
    the minimal amount of Bluetooth        which is the first stage of any
    services required for use as a         Bluetooth attack.
    headset for a handheld device.
                                           Security Mode 3 provides link-level
                                           security, which requires
                                           authentication and encryption prior
    Bluetooth Security Mode 3 (link        to link establishment. (However,
    level security) should be used by      note that v2.1 devices cannot use
6   both the headset and the audio         Security Mode 3.) 128-bit
    gateway device along with 128-         encryption is the maximum provided
    bit Bluetooth encryption.              by the Bluetooth specification, so it
                                           should be used to mitigate potential
                                           attacks against lower entropy (weak)
                                           cryptographic keys.
    Devices should support only a
                                           Bluetooth headset support for
    single headset connection
                                           multiple simultaneous connections
7   between one headset and one
                                           would provide an additional attack
    handheld device or audio
                                           vector.
    gateway device.
    The user should be able to
    authorize all initial incoming         The user should be made aware of,
    connection requests, and there         and explicitly authorize, all
8   should be an indication of any         connections associated with the
    active Bluetooth link on both the      headset to preclude potential
    handheld device and the                attacks.
    Bluetooth headset.
    Bluetooth stack lockdown
    techniques should be used on
    the handheld device to disable
    unauthorized Bluetooth
    connections (headset profile and
    serial port profile are authorized).   The Bluetooth stack on the handheld
                                           device should only support the
    Unnecessary Bluetooth services,
                                           minimal services/profiles approved
9   user controls, and applications
                                           for use. Supporting unauthorized
    should be either removed from
                                           services/profiles could introduce
    the handheld device or reliably
                                           vulnerabilities.
    disabled permanently so that
    users cannot enable them.
    Note: This feature may already
    be included with the handheld
    device security policy manager.




                                                        4-11
                                                                                                GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



Table 4-4 provides recommendations on Bluetooth smart card readers based on DoD’s Bluetooth Smart
Card Reader Security Requirements Matrix (01 June 2007)21 . Note that FIPS-140 validated encryption is
recommended in addition to native Bluetooth authentication and encryption.

                                Table 4-4. Bluetooth Smart Card Reader Security Checklist

                                                                                                        Checklist
                                                   Security Need, Requirement, or           Recom-
              Security Recommendation                                                                      Should
                                                            Justification                   mended                   Status
                                                                                                          Consider
                                                                                            Practice
                                                 Strong authentication and encryption
                                                 is essential to network security,
                                                 especially wireless connections.
           Bluetooth mutual authentication,
                                                 Mutual authentication confirms both
           128-bit Bluetooth encryption, and
                                                 devices have the appropriate link
           FIPS 140-validated cryptography
                                                 key, and 128-bit encryption is the
     1     should all be used for all
                                                 maximum key length provided by the
           communications between the
                                                 Bluetooth specification. FIPS 140-
           smart card reader and the host
                                                 validated cryptography should also
           device.
                                                 be used to compensate for
                                                 weaknesses in the native Bluetooth
                                                 encryption.
                                                 For pre-v2.1 devices, this is
                                                 essential to prevent link key cracking
                                                 if pairing messages have been
                                                 successfully eavesdropped by an
                                                 attacker.
           Bluetooth pairing passkeys            Note that v2.1 devices using the
           should be at least eight decimal      Numerical Comparison or Passkey
     2                                           Entry association models will always
           digits in length and generated
           randomly for each pairing.            use a 6-digit passkey per the
                                                 Bluetooth specification. This is
                                                 currently deemed adequate since
                                                 v2.1 passkeys used during Secure
                                                 Simple Pairing—by design—cannot
                                                 be used to derive the associated link
                                                 key.
                                                 Key establishment is a vital security
                                                 function and requires that users
           Perform pairing as infrequently       maintain a security awareness of
           as possible, ideally in a secure      possible eavesdroppers. If an
           area where attackers cannot           attacker can capture the transmitted
           realistically observe the passkey     frames associated with pairing,
           entry and intercept Bluetooth         determining the link key is
     3
           pairing messages. (Note: A            straightforward for pre-v.2.1 devices
           “secure area” is defined as a         (security is solely dependent on PIN
           non-public area that is indoors       entropy and length). This is also
           away from windows in locations        recommended for v2.1 devices,
           with physical access controls.)       although similar attacks against
                                                 Secure Simple Pairing have not yet
                                                 been documented.
           Bluetooth mutual authentication       Devices should authenticate each
           should occur immediately after        other as soon as possible and
     4
           the initial establishment of any      certainly before providing access to
           Bluetooth connection.                 any offered services.


21
         http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/checklist/DoD-Bluetooth-Smart-Card-Reader-Security-Requirements-Matrix.pdf


                                                               4-12
                                                                                        GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



                                                                                                Checklist
                                            Security Need, Requirement, or           Recom-
      Security Recommendation                                                                     Should
                                                     Justification                   mended                 Status
                                                                                                 Consider
                                                                                     Practice
    The Bluetooth smart card reader
    should remain undiscoverable to
    other Bluetooth devices at all         While a Bluetooth device is in
    times other than the initial pairing   discoverable mode, any inquiring
    process and cannot initiate            device within range can capture
5   Bluetooth connections on its           important connection information
    own. It should only support the        including device address and clock,
    minimal amount of Bluetooth            which is the first stage of any
    services required for use as a         Bluetooth attack.
    smart card reader for a single
    host device.
                                           The Bluetooth stack on the host
    Unnecessary Bluetooth services,
                                           device should only support the
    user controls, and applications
                                           minimal features approved for use.
6   should be either removed from
                                           Supporting other features could
    the host device or reliably
                                           introduce vulnerabilities
    disabled permanently.
                                           unnecessarily.
    All Bluetooth profiles except for
                                           Additional profiles could introduce
    Serial Port Profile should be
                                           vulnerabilities unnecessarily. The
7   disabled at all times, and the
                                           Serial Port Profile is the only profile
    user should not be able to enable
                                           needed for smart card readers.
    them.




                                                         4-13
                                                                               GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



Appendix A—Glossary of Terms

Selected terms used in the publication are defined below.

Access Point (AP): A device that logically connects wireless client devices operating in infrastructure to
one another and provides access to a distribution system, if connected, which is typically an
organization’s enterprise wired network.

Ad Hoc Network: A wireless network that dynamically connects wireless client devices to each other
without the use of an infrastructure device, such as an access point or a base station.

Claimant: The Bluetooth device attempting to prove its identity to the verifier during the Bluetooth
connection process.

Flooding: An attack in which an attacker sends large numbers of wireless messages at a high rate to
prevent the wireless network from processing legitimate traffic.

Infrared (IR): An invisible band of radiation at the lower end of the electromagnetic spectrum. It starts
at the middle of the microwave spectrum and extends to the beginning of visible light. Infrared
transmission requires an unobstructed line of sight between transmitter and receiver.

Infrastructure Network: A wireless network that requires the use of an infrastructure device, such as an
access point or a base station, to facilitate communication between client devices.

Jamming: A device emitting electromagnetic energy on a wireless network’s frequency to make it
unusable.

Media Access Control (MAC): A unique 48-bit value that is assigned to a particular wireless network
interface by the manufacturer.

Piconet: A small Bluetooth network created on an ad hoc basis that includes two or more devices.

Range: The maximum possible distance for communicating with a wireless network infrastructure or
wireless client.

Scatternet: A chain of piconets created by allowing one or more Bluetooth devices to each be a slave in
one piconet and act as the master for another piconet simultaneously. A scatternet allows several devices
to be networked over an extended distance.

Verifier: The Bluetooth device that validates the identity of the claimant during the Bluetooth connection
process.

Wireless Bridge: A device that links two wired networks, generally operating at two different physical
locations, through wireless communications.

Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN): A group of wireless AP and associated infrastructure within a
limited geographic area, such as an office building or building campus, that is capable of radio
communications. WLANs are usually implemented as extensions of existing wired LANs to provide
enhanced user mobility.




                                                    A-1
                                                                              GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



Wireless Personal Area Network (WPAN): A small-scale wireless network that requires little or no
infrastructure and operates within a short range. A WPAN is typically used by a few devices in a single
room instead of connecting the devices with cables.




                                                   A-2
                                                                             GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



Appendix B—Acronyms and Abbreviations

Selected acronyms and abbreviations used in the publication are defined below.

ACO             Authenticated Cipher Offset
AFH             Adaptive Frequency Hopping
AP              Access Point

dBm             Decibels referenced to one milliwatt
DISA            Defense Information Systems Agency
DoD             Department of Defense

ECDH            Elliptic Curve Diffie Hellman
EDR             Enhanced Data Rate

FHSS            Frequency Hopping Spread Spectrum
FIPS            Federal Information Processing Standard
FISMA           Federal Information Security Management Act

GHz             Gigahertz

HCI             Host Controller Interface

IBC             Iterated Block Ciphers
IEEE            Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
IP              Internet Protocol
IPSec           Internet Protocol Security
IR              Infrared
ISM             Industrial, Scientific, and Medical
ITL             Information Technology Laboratory

Kbps            Kilobits per second
KG              Key Generator
KSG             Key Stream Generator

L2CAP           Logical Link Control and Adaptation Protocol
LAN             Local Area Network
LFSR            Linear Feedback Shift Register
LMP             Link Manager Protocol

MAC             Medium Access Control
Mbps            Megabits per second
MITM            Man-in-the-Middle
mW              Milliwatt

NFC             Near Field Communication
NIST            National Institute of Standards and Technology

OMB             Office of Management and Budget
OOB             Out of Band



                                                   B-1
                                                GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY




P2P     Peer to Peer
PC      Personal Computer
PDA     Personal Digital Assistant
PHY     Physical Layer
PIN     Personal Identification Number
PKI     Public Key Infrastructure

RF      Radio Frequency
RNG     Random Number Generator
RSSI    Received Signal Strength Indication

SAFER   Secure And Fast Encryption Routine
SDP     Service Discovery Protocol
SIG     Special Interest Group
SP      Special Publication
SRES    Signed Response
SSP     Secure Simple Pairing

TDM     Time Division Multiplexing

USB     Universal Serial Bus

WLAN    Wireless Local Area Network
WPAN    Wireless Personal Area Networks




                                          B-2
                                                                              GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



Appendix C—References

The list below provides references for the publication.

Bluetooth Special Interest Group, Bluetooth 2.0 and 2.1 specifications,
http://www.bluetooth.com/Bluetooth/Technology/Building/Specifications/

Bluetooth Special Interest Group, “Bluetooth Security White Paper”, May 2002,
http://www.bluetooth.com/NR/rdonlyres/E870794C-2788-49BF-96D3-
C9578E0AE21D/0/security_whitepaper_v1.pdf

Bluetooth Special Interest Group, “Simple Pairing Whitepaper”, August 2006,
http://bluetooth.com/NR/rdonlyres/0A0B3F36-D15F-4470-85A6-
F2CCFA26F70F/0/SimplePairing_WP_V10r00.pdf

C. Gehrmann, J. Persson, and B. Smeets, Bluetooth Security, Artech House, 2004

Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA), “DoD Bluetooth Headset Security Requirements Matrix”,
Version 2.0, 07 April 2008,
http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/checklist/dod_bluetooth_headset_security_requirements_matrix_v2-
0_7april2008.pdf

Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA), “DoD Bluetooth Smart Card Reader Security
Requirements Matrix”, Version 2.0, 01 June 2007, http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/checklist/DoD-Bluetooth-
Smart-Card-Reader-Security-Requirements-Matrix.pdf

Y. Lu, W. Meier, and S. Vaudenay, “The Conditional Correlation Attack: A Practical Attack on Bluetooth
Encryption”, http://lasecwww.epfl.ch/pub/lasec/doc/LMV05.pdf

Y. Shaked and A. Wool, “Cracking the Bluetooth PIN”, In Proc. 3rd USENIX/ACM Conf.
Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services (MobiSys), pages 39-50, Seattle, WA, June 2005




                                                    C-1
                                                                                        GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY



Appendix D—Online Resources

The lists below provide examples of online resources related to Bluetooth technologies and wireless
network security that may be helpful to readers.

Documents

                      Name                                                         URL
Bluetooth SIG Specifications                         http://www.bluetooth.com/Bluetooth/Technology/Building/Spe
                                                     cifications/
DoD Bluetooth Headset Security Requirements          http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/checklist/dod_bluetooth_headset_sec
Matrix (Version 2.0, 07 April 2008)                  urity_requirements_matrix_v2-0_7april2008.pdf
DoD Bluetooth Smart Card Reader Security             http://iase.disa.mil/stigs/checklist/DoD-Bluetooth-Smart-Card-
Requirements Matrix (Version 2.0, 01 June 2007)      Reader-Security-Requirements-Matrix.pdf
FIPS 140-2, Security Requirements for                http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips140-2/fips1402.pdf
Cryptographic Modules
FIPS 180-2, Secure Hash Standard (SHS)               http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips180-2/fips180-
                                                     2withchangenotice.pdf
FIPS 197, Advanced Encryption Standard               http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips197/fips-197.pdf
FIPS 199, Standards for Security Categorization of   http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/fips/fips199/FIPS-PUB-199-
Federal Information and Information Systems          final.pdf
GAO-05-383, Information Security: Federal            http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d05383.pdf
Agencies Need to Improve Controls over Wireless
Networks
GRS 24, Information Technology Operations and        http://www.archives.gov/records-mgmt/ardor/grs24.html
Management Records
NIST SP 800-30, Risk Management Guide for            http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-30/sp800-30.pdf
Information Technology Systems
NIST SP 800-32, Introduction to Public Key           http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-32/sp800-32.pdf
Technology and the Federal PKI Infrastructure
NIST SP 800-48 Revision 1, Guide to Securing         http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-48-rev1/SP800-
Legacy IEEE 802.11 Wireless Networks                 48r1.pdf
NIST SP 800-50, Building an Information              http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-50/NIST-SP800-
Technology Security Awareness and Training           50.pdf
Program
NIST SP 800-53 Revision 2, Recommended               http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-53-Rev2/sp800-
Security Controls for Federal Information Systems    53-rev2-final.pdf
NIST SP 800-63, Electronic Authentication            http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-63/SP800-
Guideline                                            63V1_0_2.pdf
NIST SP 800-63-1 (Draft), Electronic                 http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html
Authentication Guideline
NIST SP 800-64, Security Considerations in the       http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-64/NIST-SP800-
Information System Development Life Cycle            64.pdf
NIST SP 800-70, Security Configuration Checklists    http://checklists.nist.gov/docs/SP_800-70_20050526.pdf
Program for IT Products – Guidance for Checklists
Users and Developers
NIST SP 800-111, Guide to Storage Encryption         http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-111/SP800-
Technologies for End User Devices                    111.pdf
NIST SP 800-114, User's Guide to Securing            http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-114/SP800-
External Devices for Telework and Remote Access      114.pdf




                                                       D-1
                                                                               GUIDE TO BLUETOOTH SECURITY




Resource Sites

                                 Name                                                  URL
Bluetooth Special Interest Group                                http://www.bluetooth.com/
                                                                http://www.bluetooth.org/
Cellular Telecommunications and Internet Association (CTIA)     http://www.ctia.org/
Federal Communications Commission                               http://www.fcc.gov/
FIPS-Validated Cryptographic Modules                            http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/STM/index.html
IEEE 802.15 Working Group for Wireless Personal Area Networks   http://www.ieee802.org/15/
NIST National Vulnerability Database (NVD)                      http://nvd.nist.gov/
NIST’s National Checklist Program                               http://checklists.nist.gov/
Trifinite Group (Bluetooth Security Research)                   http://www.trifinite.org/
Wireless Vulnerabilities and Exploits                           http://www.wirelessve.org/




                                                      D-2
