                  NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 800-211




2019 ANNUAL REPORT
  NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM
                                    THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK




Front cover image credit: Shutterstock / Khakimullin Aleksandr
NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 800-211


ANNUAL REPORT 2019
NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM
     PATRICK O’REILLY, EDITOR                   KRISTINA RIGOPOULOS, EDITOR
     Computer Security Division                   Applied Cybersecurity Division
 Information Technology Laboratory             Information Technology Laboratory

                                 CO-EDITORS:
                                Larry Feldman
                                  Greg Witte
                          Huntington Ingalls Industries
                          Annapolis Junction, Maryland



THIS PUBLICATION IS AVAILABLE FREE OF CHARGE FROM
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-211



AUGUST 2020




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
Wilbur L. Ross, Jr., Secretary

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
Walter Copan, NIST Director and Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology
     AUTHORITY
     This publication has been developed by NIST in accordance with its statutory
     responsibilities under the Federal Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of
     2014, 44 U.S.C. § 3551 et seq., Public Law (P.L.) 113-283. NIST is responsible for developing
     information security standards and guidelines, including minimum requirements for
     federal information systems, but such standards and guidelines shall not apply to
     national security systems without the express approval of appropriate federal officials
     exercising policy authority over such systems. This guideline is consistent with the
     requirements of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130.
     Nothing in this publication should be taken to contradict the standards and guidelines
     made mandatory and binding on federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under
     statutory authority. Nor should these guidelines be interpreted as altering or superseding
     the existing authorities of the Secretary of Commerce, Director of the OMB, or any other
     federal official. This publication may be used by nongovernmental organizations on a
     voluntary basis and is not subject to copyright in the United States. Attribution would,
     however, be appreciated by NIST.


            National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-211
             Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 800-211, 60 pages (August 2020)
                                          CODEN: NSPUE2


                          This publication is available free of charge from:
                              https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-211




II


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
Certain commercial entities, equipment, or materials may be identified in this
document in order to describe an experimental procedure or concept adequately.
Such identification is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement
by NIST, nor is it intended to imply that the entities, materials, or equipment are
necessarily the best available for the purpose.
There may be references in this publication to other publications currently under
development by NIST in accordance with its assigned statutory responsibilities.
The information in this publication, including concepts and methodologies, may
be used by federal agencies even before the completion of such companion
publications. Thus, until each publication is completed, current requirements,
guidelines, and procedures, where they exist, remain operative. For planning and
transition purposes, federal agencies may wish to closely follow the development
of these new publications by NIST.
Organizations are encouraged to review all draft publications during public
comment periods and provide feedback to NIST. Many NIST cybersecurity
publications, other than the ones noted above, are available at
https://csrc.nist.gov/publications.



       Comments on this publication may be submitted to:
                National Institute of Standards and Technology
      Attn: Computer Security Division, Information Technology Laboratory
       100 Bureau Drive (Mail Stop 8930) Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930
                 Email: cybersecurity.annualreport@nist.gov
All comments are subject to release under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).




                                                                                      III


                           NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     REPORTS ON COMPUTER SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY
     The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Information Technology
     Laboratory (ITL) promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical
     leadership for the Nation’s measurement and standards infrastructure. ITL develops tests,
     test methods, reference data, proof-of-concept implementations, and technical analyses
     to advance the development and productive use of information technology. ITL’s
     responsibilities include the development of management, administrative, technical, and
     physical standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of national
     security-related information in federal information systems. The Special Publication
     800-series reports on ITL’s research, guidelines, and outreach efforts in information
     system security and its collaborative activities with industry, government, and academic
     organizations.


     ABSTRACT
     During Fiscal Year 2019 (FY 2019), from October 1, 2018 through September 30, 2019,
     the NIST Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) Cybersecurity and Privacy Program
     successfully responded to numerous challenges and opportunities in security and
     privacy. This annual report highlights the FY 2019 research agenda and activities for
     the ITL Cybersecurity and Privacy Program, including: the ongoing participation and
     development of international standards; the enhancement of privacy and security
     risk management models, including those for the protection of controlled unclassified
     information (CUI), systems engineering and cyber resiliency, supply chains, and
     mobile technologies; the continued advancement of cryptographic technologies,
     including updates to Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) Publication 140-3,
     Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, and preparation for post-quantum
     cryptographic methods; and improved infrastructure protection in areas such as zero
     trust architectures and advanced networking security. NIST maintained a strong focus
     on supporting small and medium-sized businesses (SMBs), including updates to the
     Small Business Cybersecurity Corner website to make resources easier to find and use,
     and drawing on contributed cybersecurity resources and feedback received from federal
     partners and the public.


     KEYWORDS
     annual report; Advanced Network Technologies Division; ANTD; Applied Cybersecurity
     Division; ACD; Computer Security Division; CSD; Cybersecurity; Cybersecurity Program;
     Federal Information Security Management Act; FISMA; privacy; program highlights;
     Information Access Division; IAD; information security; Information Technology
     Laboratory; ITL; program accomplishments; Software and Systems Division; SSD.

IV


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1


Focus Area 1: Advancing Cybersecurity and Privacy Standards . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3


Focus Area 2: Enhancing Risk Management . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5


Focus Area 3: Strengthening Cryptographic Standards and Validation . . . . . . . . . .13


Focus Area 4: Advanced Cybersecurity Research & Applications Development . . . . .17


Focus Area 5: Improving Cybersecurity Awareness, Training, and Education
              and Workforce Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20


Focus Area 6: Enhancing Identity and Access Management                  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24


Focus Area 7: Bolstering Communications and Infrastructure Protection                   . . . . . . . 27


Focus Area 8: Securing Emerging Technologies               . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34


Focus Area 9: Advancing Security Test and Measurement Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37


Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42


References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43


Acronyms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47


Opportunities to Engage with the NIST Cybersecurity Program During FY 2020 . . 49




                                                                                                            V


                                   NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                       THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK




VI


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
FOREWORD
Last year’s annual report on cybersecurity noted that NIST is “picking up the pace” in
advancing cybersecurity and privacy, and a look back at Fiscal Year 2019 proved that to
be an understatement. The year witnessed a significant increase in the degree and kind
of our collaborations to expand and improve the building blocks of cybersecurity.
That greater collaboration helped us deal with the ever-quickening speed of
technological changes that present one challenge after another in cybersecurity. By
working closely with partners in the private sector, universities, and other agencies both
in the United States and abroad, NIST made great progress in researching and providing
practical methods to achieve improved security and privacy risk management, stronger
cryptography, more secure communications, more reliable automation, and to better
understand, advance, and utilize other foundational elements of cybersecurity.
Helping organizations to better manage security and privacy risk, we updated the Risk
Management Framework to even more fully support organizational security and privacy
at all levels. Through a series of workshops and online forums, we brought industry
and government together to create the NIST Privacy Framework: A Tool for Improving
Privacy through Enterprise Risk Management. The NIST Cybersecurity Framework
continues to gain users as companies and government organizations around the world
have recognized the value of that model and are translating it, tailoring it to adapt to
local needs, and using it to provide a common language for communicating about and
achieving good cybersecurity risk management practices.
The world of cryptography is getting larger and smaller at the same time. This report
describes some of the notable accomplishments in NIST’s continuing quest with our
collaborators to evaluate and standardize quantum-resistant public-key cryptographic
algorithms. At the other end of the spectrum, we advanced lightweight cryptography
to balance the security needs for circuits smaller than were even dreamed of just a few
years ago.
NIST’s work on secure software development and systems engineering reinforces the
need to design and implement software and systems that are secure, resilient, and
trustworthy from the start—a theme that runs throughout many of the resources we
produced and updated in FY 2019 and describe in this report.
Advances in new and emerging technologies and approaches like blockchain, artificial
intelligence, 5th Generation (5G) communications, secure infrastructure, zero trust
architecture, and the Internet of Things are enabling new and remarkable products. The
accomplishments and activities in this report demonstrate how NIST continues to work
with industry partners to ensure that evolving technologies are secure, reliable, and
trustworthy—now and into the future.


                                                                                             1


                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
    The year marked a decade of progress by the NIST-managed National Initiative
    for Cybersecurity Education (NICE), to help the world address the human element
    of cybersecurity from the classroom to the workplace. Tackling the shortage of
    cybersecurity talent has become an even more urgent priority for NIST and its
    collaborators, with FY 2019 being an especially productive year.
    We kept our promise to pick up the pace, and we are excited to see what Fiscal Year
    2020 has in store. We invite you to learn more about these programs and to join us as we
    continue to build a better future on these foundations!
                        Donna Dodson
                        NIST Chief Cybersecurity Advisor




2


    NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                               CREDIT: iStock / ipopba



FOCUS AREATHIS
           1: ADVANCING         CYBERSECURITY
               PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

AND PRIVACY STANDARDS
Leadership and Participation In Developing National and
International Standards
The standards community is built upon international collaboration. NIST leverages its
foundational and applied research efforts along with its experience in leadership to
contribute to the development of national and international standards. Today, these
standards activities span cybersecurity, privacy, cryptography, and critical fields such as 5G
mobile and cellular technologies, quantum information, and the Internet of Things (IoT).
About 40 NIST staff members work with other agencies and industry to develop
cybersecurity and privacy standards through voluntary consensus Standards
Developing Organizations (SDOs). NIST’s standards strategy is captured in NIST
Interagency Report (NISTIR) 8074, Cybersecurity Interagency Report on Strategic U.S.
Government Engagement in International Standardization to Achieve U.S. Objectives for
Cybersecurity.
During FY 2019, NIST staff actively contributed to and held leadership positions in
various SDOs, including the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), the Internet
Engineering Task Force (IETF), and the International Organization for Standardization
(ISO). The NIST staff actively participated in standards bodies to raise awareness and
influence the development of privacy and cybersecurity standards, including efforts
within the ISO/IEC joint technical committee (JTC) 1 Subcommittee (SC) 27, that aligned                  3
with the principles of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework. NIST representatives also

                               NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
    FOCUS AREA 1



    participated in the ISO Project Committee (PC) 317, which focuses on developing ISO
    31700, Consumer protection: privacy by design for consumer goods and services. The
    NIST staff worked to promote the development and international use of the NIST Privacy
    Framework and its principles through engagement with several privacy standards
    activities from the Institute for Testing and Certification (ITC).
    NIST participation has also grown considerably in IoT standardization activities,
    including:
      •   ISO JTC 1/SC 41, IoT architecture and vocabulary, IoT Interoperability, and IoT
          Applications;
      •   ISO JTC 1/SC 27, IoT aspects of Security and Privacy; and
      •   IETF, Software Updates for Internet of Things Security Area.
    NIST has been instrumental in promoting and participating in the development of a
    family of voluntary ISO/IEC standards that align with NIST’s cryptographic module
    validation standard and related specifications. NIST serves as the project editor for nine
    of those standards. Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) Publication 140-3,
    Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, points to ISO/IEC 19790, Security
    Requirements for Cryptographic Modules. [1] Testing for these requirements will be
    performed in accordance with ISO/IEC 24759, Test Requirements for Cryptographic
    Modules. This is an ongoing effort and will continue over the next several years to
    support a smooth transition path to those using FIPS 140-3 specifications.
    In FY 2020, the NIST staff will continue to lead and participate in cybersecurity and
    privacy standardization efforts with an increased focus on new and emerging areas, such
    as artificial intelligence (AI), quantum information, and IoT. NIST will continue to provide
    thoughtful leadership in many SDOs by actively participating in those organizations and
    contributing publications and papers.




4


    NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                        CREDIT: Shutterstock / bleakstar



FOCUS AREATHIS
           2: ENHANCING         RISK
               PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY   MANAGEMENT
                                     LEFT BLANK

NIST has made significant progress during FY 2019 in advancing methods and guidelines
for managing organizational risk related to cybersecurity, systems engineering, and
privacy. While risk management has been a fundamental driver for organizations for as
long as there has been information to protect, advances in technology increasingly call for
a collaborative approach to engineering secure systems, securing systems managed by
external partners, and applying risk management to an ever-evolving range of products.
Notable achievements during FY 2019 included updates to several NIST endeavors that
are described below.


The Next-Generation Risk Management Framework
The Risk Management Framework (RMF) is one of NIST’s most highly used products.
Initially created for federal agencies, organizations around the globe use the RMF
because it provides a structured and flexible process for managing security and privacy
risk. The RMF includes processes for information security categorization; control
selection, implementation, and assessment; system and common control authorizations;
and continuous monitoring. It also includes activities to prepare organizations to execute
the RMF at appropriate risk management levels.
In FY 2019, NIST published SP 800-37, Revision 2, Risk Management Framework for
Information Systems and Organizations: A System Life Cycle Approach for Security
and Privacy [2]. SP 800-37, Rev. 2, represents the next-generation Risk Management
Framework (RMF) for systems, organizations, and individuals. The updates include an                        5


                               NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
    FOCUS AREA 2



    initial alignment with the constructs in the NIST Cybersecurity Framework, the integration
    of privacy risk management processes, an alignment with system life-cycle security
    engineering processes, and the incorporation of supply chain risk management processes.
    This is the first NIST publication to include a full integration of privacy risk management
    into the existing information security risk management processes. The addition of a new
    Prepare step is one of the key changes to the RMF and was incorporated to achieve
    more effective, efficient, and cost-effective security and privacy risk management
    processes. The new step works in harmony with the Framework for Improving Critical
    Infrastructure Cybersecurity (commonly referred to as the NIST Cybersecurity
    Framework) and the NIST Privacy Framework [3] [4]. The use of these models together
    institutionalizes organization-level and system-level preparation by:
      •   Facilitating communication across the organizational risk management levels;
      •   Encouraging the organization-wide identification of common controls and the
          development of organizationally tailored control baselines;
      •   Reducing the complexity of the IT infrastructure; and
      •   Providing additional methods to identify, prioritize, and focus resources on high-
          value assets commensurate with risk.
    NIST has also continued to support public and private-sector outreach and products for
    the risk management community. For example, NIST hosted a well-attended webcast
    about the RMF updates and developed an online reference site for multiple electronic
    formats of the security and privacy controls from NIST SP 800-53, Security and Privacy
    Controls for Federal Information Systems and Organizations [5].

    Advancement of Privacy Engineering and Risk Management
    NIST made significant advances in guidance and models for managing privacy risks in
    FY 2019. These privacy risks can have direct adverse consequences at both the individual
    and societal levels, with follow-on effects on organizations’ brands, bottom lines, and
    future growth prospects. NIST is dedicated to supporting innovation that provides the
    benefits of information processing while simultaneously applying methods that help
    protect the privacy of individuals.
    While managing cybersecurity risk contributes to managing privacy risk, it is
    not sufficient. Cybersecurity and privacy have both unique and overlapping risk
    management needs, as illustrated by Figure 1: Cybersecurity and Privacy Risk. Having
    a general understanding of the different origins of cybersecurity and privacy risks is
    important for determining the most effective solutions to address the risks.



6


    NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                            FOCUS AREA 2




                    Cybersecurity     Cybersecurity-          Privacy
                       Risks          related privacy          Risks
                       IDENTIFY           events
                                                            IDENTIFY-P
                      PROTECT           PROTECT-P
                                                            GOVERN-P
                       DETECT             DETECT
                                                            CONTROL-P
                      RESPOND            RESPOND
                                                         COMMUNICATE-P
                      RECOVER            RECOVER




                           Figure 1: Cybersecurity and Privacy Risk

FY 2019 was a busy and fruitful year of open collaboration with stakeholders from
across government, academia, and industry who worked together to craft and hone
tools, standards, and processes to better identify, prioritize, and manage privacy risks.
NIST also collaborated on the creation of the NIST Privacy Framework: An Enterprise
Risk Management Tool [4], which addresses the need to manage privacy issues across
the U.S. and throughout the world, improve privacy protections, and better manage
compliance with increasing global privacy requirements. The Privacy Framework—
through a risk- and outcome-based approach—is flexible enough to address diverse
privacy needs, enable more innovative and effective solutions that can lead to
better outcomes for individuals and organizations, and stay current with technology
trends such as AI and IoT. The Privacy Framework follows the structure of the NIST
Cybersecurity Framework, facilitating the use of both frameworks together. Each
framework component reinforces privacy risk management through the connection
between business and mission drivers, organizational roles and responsibilities, and
privacy protection activities. The Privacy Framework was developed from comments to
public requests for information (RFI) and discussions during three public workshops,
five webinars, and hundreds of direct interactions with stakeholders. A public draft was
released at the end of FY 2019, and the subsequent final version was released in early
FY 2020.
While the Privacy Framework represents a great leap forward in the privacy risk
management space, NIST also supported advancement in several areas of privacy
engineering in FY 2019.
  •   NIST guidance has sought to highlight the importance of security and privacy for
      all organizations and enterprises. Privacy aspects were subsequently integrated
      into many of NIST’s publications, such as SP 800-37, Revision 2, and NISTIR 8228,
      Considerations for Managing IoT Cybersecurity and Privacy Risks [6].
                                                                                            7


                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
    FOCUS AREA 2



      •   NIST has driven change and standardization through leadership positions in many
          key organizations. The NIST staff fills leadership positions in key organizations,
          including membership in the Privacy Engineering Advisory Board for the
          International Association of Privacy Professionals (IAPP), co-chairmanship of
          the Interagency Working Group (IWG) for Privacy at the U.S. Networking and
          Information Technology Research and Development (NITRD), and working group
          chairmanship at ISO Technical Committee ISO/PC 317, Consumer protection:
          privacy by design for consumer goods and services. Through these and many
          other programs, NIST provides leadership and direction and helps drive application
          standards for important risk management focus areas.
      •   NIST has fostered leadership and partnership through the Privacy Collaboration
          Space—an online venue open to the public where practitioners can discover,
          share, discuss, and improve upon open-source tools, solutions, and processes that
          support privacy engineering and risk management. Following the NIST tradition of
          open and transparent partnerships, the collaboration space was launched with an
          initial focus on:
          •   De-identification: a technique or process applied to a dataset with the goal of
              preventing or limiting certain types of privacy risks to individuals, protected
              groups, and establishments while still allowing for the production of aggregate
              statistics. This focus area includes a broad scope of de-identification to allow for
              noise-introducing techniques, such as differential privacy, data masking, and the
              creation of synthetic datasets that are based on privacy-preserving models.
          •   Privacy Risk Assessment: a process that helps organizations to analyze and
              assess privacy risks for individuals that arise from the processing of their data.
              This focus area includes risk models, risk assessment methodologies, and
              approaches to determining privacy risk factors. Through the new space, which
              is enabled by the Github repository, the community can contribute to privacy
              engineering in the form of tools, use cases, and feedback on existing entries.


    Advancing the Application of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework
    Having published the updated Cybersecurity Framework Version 1.1 in FY 2018,
    NIST continued to work with the risk management community to support outreach,
    application, and implementation. The NIST Cybersecurity Framework website has
    expanded to provide learning materials, success stories, and industry resources. Among
    those resources is NISTIR 8183, Cybersecurity Framework Manufacturing Profile [7]. Co-
    developed with NIST’s Engineering Laboratory (EL), this report applies the Cybersecurity
    Framework components to help describe specific cybersecurity activities and outcomes
    for the protection of the manufacturing system and its components, facility, and
    environment.
    Another advancement in the application of the Cybersecurity Framework is the
8   implementation of an online catalog of informative references. In FY 2019, NIST launched


    NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                                FOCUS AREA 2



the National Cybersecurity Online Informative References (OLIR) Program to facilitate
subject matter experts in defining online informative references (OLIRs) between
the cybersecurity elements of their documents and the cybersecurity elements of
other documents, like the Cybersecurity Framework. The OLIR Program provides a
standardized format for expressing OLIRs and a centralized location for accessing and
comparing them. NISTIR 8278, National Cybersecurity OLIR Program: Guidelines for OLIR
Users and Developers, describes the OLIR Program, explains what OLIRs are, how they
can be beneficial, and how subject matter experts can contribute OLIRs [8].
The Informative Reference catalog implements a federated model, where submitting
parties develop and host their respective Informative References. NIST released NISTIR
8204, Cybersecurity Framework OLIR Submissions: Specification for Completing
the OLIR Template, which provides guidance to Informative Reference developers
for completing and submitting OLIRs [9]. NIST analyzes the submitted OLIRs for
correctness, works with submitters regarding any corrections, and hosts links to the
public draft and final versions of the OLIRs.
The OLIR Program integrates ongoing NIST projects that respond to administrative and
legislative requirements. The OLIR Program can incorporate any authoritative documents,
from national and international standards, guidelines, frameworks, and regulations to
policies for individual organizations, sectors, or jurisdictions. By following this approach,
cybersecurity document owners can use the OLIR Program as a mechanism for
communicating with owners and users of other cybersecurity documents.

Protecting Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI)
Other risk management-focused NIST cybersecurity accomplishments in FY 2019
included continued outreach and updates regarding recommendations for protecting
the confidentiality of controlled, unclassified information (CUI) in nonfederal systems
and organizations. A significant amount of federal CUI is entrusted to external entities.
Safeguarding that CUI is of paramount importance and can directly affect the ability of
federal agencies to successfully protect their information.
In FY 2019, NIST partnered with the National Archives and Records Administration
(NARA)—designated as the CUI Executive Agent by Executive Order 13556, Controlled
Unclassified Information—on several publications:
  •   Draft SP 800-171, Revision 2, Protecting Controlled Unclassified Information
      in Nonfederal Systems and Organizations, provides updates to Chapter One
      (Introduction), Chapter Two (The Fundamentals), Glossary, Acronyms, and
      References appendices [10].
  •   Draft SP 800-171A, Assessing Security Requirements for Controlled Unclassified
      Information, which provides federal and nonfederal organizations with assessment
      procedures and a methodology that can be employed to conduct assessments of
      the CUI security requirements in SP 800-171, Revision 1 [11].                             9


                                NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     FOCUS AREA 2



       •   Draft SP 800-171B, Protecting Controlled Unclassified Information in Nonfederal
           Systems and Organizations: Enhanced Security Requirements for Critical Programs
           and High Value Assets, which provides enhanced security requirements that
           apply only to components of nonfederal systems that process, store, or transmit
           CUI or that provide protection for such components when the designated CUI is
           contained in a critical program or high-value asset [12]. The enhanced security
           requirements are only applicable to a nonfederal system or organization when
           mandated by a federal agency in a contract, grant, or other agreement.
     In October 2018, NIST coordinated with the Department of Defense (DoD) and NARA to
     host an informational workshop that provided an overview of CUI, updates about recent
     changes to CUI provisions in the Defense Federal Acquisition Regulations Supplement
     (DFARS), and NIST Special Publications 800-171 and 800-171A. This workshop featured
     panels of Federal Government representatives (who discussed expectations for
     evaluating evidence and implementing the CUI security requirements) and industry
     representatives (who shared best practices and lessons learned).


     Systems Security Engineering (SP 800-160, Volumes 1 & 2)
     In FY 2019, NIST continued to foster the engineering-driven perspective and actions
     necessary to develop more defensible and survivable systems, including the machine,
     physical, and human components that compose the systems and the capabilities and
     services delivered by those systems. The Systems Security Engineering (SSE) approach
     builds upon well-established international standards for systems and software and fuses
     systems security engineering methods, practices, and techniques. The objective is to
     address security issues from the perspective of stakeholder protection needs, concerns,
     and requirements using established engineering processes so that appropriate fidelity
     and rigor are addressed early on and in a sustainable manner throughout the life cycle
     of the system. NIST also published the first draft in a series of specialty publications
     that were developed to support the NIST SSE guideline. Volume 2 addresses cyber
     resiliency considerations for two important, yet distinct, communities of interest: 1) those
     conducting the new development of IT component products, systems, and services and
     2) those with legacy systems (having an installed base) currently carrying out day-to-
     day mission and business functions.
     An element of this focus on risk-based SSE included the publication of a new NIST
     Cybersecurity White Paper entitled, Mitigating the Risk of Software Vulnerabilities by
     Adopting a Secure Software Development Framework (SSDF) [13]. This white paper
     builds on a proven software development life cycle (SDLC) methodology for designing,
     creating, and maintaining software and encouraging the integration of specific secure
     software development practices. Benefits of SSDF include reducing the number of
     vulnerabilities in released software, mitigating the potential exploitation of undetected or
     unaddressed vulnerabilities, and addressing the root causes of vulnerabilities to prevent
     future recurrences.
10


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                                  FOCUS AREA 2



The white paper represents an example of the SSE project described above, fostering
a subset of high-level practices that are based on established standards, guidance, and
secure software development practice documents. These practices, collectively called a
secure software development framework (SSDF), should be particularly helpful for the
target audiences to achieve security software development objectives. Such a framework
is advantageous because an organization in any sector or community, regardless of
size or cybersecurity sophistication, can integrate the framework into any existing
software development workflow and automated toolchain. It can be applied to typical IT
infrastructures as well as more unique models, such as industrial control systems (ICS),
cyber-physical systems (CPS), or IoT.


Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management (C-SCRM)
Information and operational technology (IT/OT) rely on a complex, globally distributed
and interconnected supply chain ecosystem to provide highly refined, cost-effective, and
reusable solutions. This ecosystem is composed of various entities with multiple tiers of
outsourcing, diverse distribution routes, assorted technologies, laws, policies, procedures,
and practices—all of which interact to design, manufacture, distribute, deploy, use,
maintain, and manage IT/OT products and services.
Organizations are increasingly at risk of supply chain compromise, whether intentional or
unintentional. Many beneficial factors (e.g., low-cost, interoperability, rapid innovation, and
product variety) also increase the risk of a compromise to the cyber supply chain, which
may result in risks to the end user. Managing cyber supply chain risks requires ensuring
the integrity, security, quality, and resilience of the supply chain and its products and
services. Cyber supply chain risks may include the insertion of counterfeits, unauthorized
production, tampering, theft, and the insertion of malicious software and hardware as well
as poor manufacturing and development practices in the cyber supply chain.
An important NIST initiative is Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management (C-SCRM), the
process of identifying, assessing, and mitigating the risks associated with the distributed
and interconnected nature of IT/OT product and service supply chains. C-SCRM is
integrated into Systems Security Engineering (described above) and covers the entire
system life cycle (including design, development, distribution, deployment, acquisition,
maintenance, and destruction) since supply chain threats and vulnerabilities may
(intentionally or unintentionally) compromise an IT/OT product or service at any stage.
SCRM work in FY 2019 included:
  •   Development of the draft NISTIR 8272, Impact Analysis Tool for Interdependent
      Cyber Supply Chain Risks, which describes a prototype solution for filling the gap
      between an organization’s risk appetite and supply chain risk posture by providing a
      basic measurement of the potential impact of a cyber supply chain event [14]. This
      tool does not represent a complete supply chain risk management solution, but it
      is intended to be integrated into or used in concert with tools such as third-party
      management, enterprise resource planning, and supply chain management efforts.              11


                                NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     FOCUS AREA 2



       •   Participation in the Federal Acquisition Security Council (created as a requirement
           of the U.S. Federal Acquisition Supply Chain Security Act of 2018). The council
           helps to develop policies and processes for agencies to use when purchasing
           technology products. It works closely with many federal entitities (such as the
           Department of Homeland Security’s National Risk Management Center) to
           support supply chain-related risks in acquisition of items such as: IT, including
           cloud computing services of all types; telecommunications equipment or
           telecommunications services; information processing; and IT hardware, systems,
           devices, software, or services that include embedded or incidental information
           technology.
       •   Development of a draft NISTIR 8276, Key Practices in Cyber Supply Chain Risk
           Management: Observations from Industry, to provide a high-level summary of
           practices deemed by subject matter experts to be foundational to an effective
           cyber supply chain risk management program [15]. This work builds on the
           Roadmap for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, a companion
           document to the NIST Cybersecurity Framework. Since NIST has researched
           industry practices in cyber supply chain risk management (C-SCRM) through
           engagement with industry leaders, the group was able to identify some helpful
           practices. The NISTIR is based on an analysis of interviews with companies over
           several years (leading to the development of 24 case studies), prior NIST research
           in cyber supply chain risk management, and several standards and industry best
           practices documents.




12


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                         CREDIT: Shutterstock / faithie



FOCUS AREATHIS
           3: STRENGTHENING            CRYPTOGRAPHIC
               PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

STANDARDS AND VALIDATION
Network and data security are essential in today’s environment of increasingly open
and interconnected systems, networks, and mobile devices. Cryptographic standards,
algorithms, and methods for encryption, key establishment, and digital signatures
provide a critical foundation for mobile device conversations, secure e-Commerce
transactions, electronic lock access, and much more. Cryptography is a continually
evolving field that drives research and innovation. The Data Encryption Standard (DES)
was groundbreaking but today would fall far short of the necessary levels of protection.
The accomplishments below demonstrate NIST’s continued dedication to the role it has
fulfilled for nearly 50 years—leading public and private collaborations to foster continued
improvement and reliability in cryptographic techniques and technology.


Post-Quantum Cryptography (PQC)
In recent years, there has been a substantial amount of research on quantum
computers—machines that exploit quantum mechanical phenomena to solve
mathematical problems that are difficult or intractable for conventional computers.
When the capacity to build large-scale quantum computers exists, they will be able
to break many of the public-key cryptosystems currently in use. This would seriously
compromise the confidentiality and integrity of digital communications on the internet
and elsewhere. The goal of post-quantum cryptography (also called quantum-resistant
cryptography) is to develop cryptographic systems that are secure against both
                                                                                                          13


                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     FOCUS AREA 3



     quantum and classical computers and can interoperate with existing communications
     protocols and networks.
     The question of when a large-scale quantum computer will be built is a complicated one.
     In the past, it was less clear that large quantum computers were a physical possibility,
     but many scientists now believe it to be merely a significant engineering challenge.
     Some engineers even predict that within the next 20 or so years, sufficiently large
     quantum computers will be built to break essentially all public key schemes currently
     in use. Historically, it has taken decades to deploy modern public-key cryptography
     infrastructure, so efforts to prepare information security systems that are resistant to
     quantum computing must begin now.
     NIST is in the process of soliciting, evaluating, and standardizing the needed quantum-
     resistant public-key cryptographic algorithms. The intent is for new public-key
     cryptography standards to specify one or more additional unclassified, publicly disclosed
     digital signature, public-key encryption, and key-establishment algorithms that are
     available worldwide and capable of protecting sensitive government information well
     into the foreseeable future, including after the advent of quantum computers.
     In FY 2019, NIST announced the result of its work to winnow the group of potential
     algorithms to 26. NIST mathematicians and computer scientists consider these
     algorithms to be the strongest candidates submitted to the Post-Quantum Cryptography
     Standardization project. The list includes 17 second-round candidates for public-key
     encryption and key-establishment algorithms as well as nine second-round candidates
     for digital signatures. (The complete list is available at https://csrc.nist.gov/news/2019/
     pqc-standardization-process-2nd-round-candidates and is described in NISTIR
     8240, Status Report on the First Round of the NIST Post-Quantum Cryptography
     Standardization Process [16].) This accomplishment represents several years of
     intensive research and industry collaboration. For the next year, NIST will work with the
     cryptographic community to focus on analyzing the performance of these algorithms to
     understand how they will perform in the real world.
     For several years, NIST has solicited public comments on draft minimum acceptability
     requirements, submission requirements, and evaluation criteria for candidate algorithms.
     The comments received are posted along with a summary of the changes made as
     a result of these comments. In FY 2019, submissions and comments continued and
     were shared with the cryptographic community. Additionally, NIST has participated in
     outreach events such as 2019 Second PQC Standardization Conference at the University
     of California, Santa Barbara.
     NIST extends its appreciation to all submitters and those providing public comments
     during the post-quantum algorithm evaluation process.




14


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                                FOCUS AREA 3



Lightweight Cryptography
Many elements of modern technology rely on cryptography to provide confidentiality
and to ensure the integrity of information being exchanged. While many of today’s
cryptographic methods are reliable, they require time and power that many devices
(e.g. sensor networks, healthcare, distributed control systems, IoT, and cyber-
physical systems) may not have available. The small and simple nature of the millions
of electronic devices making up the IoT renders them unequipped to process the
current cryptographic algorithms. To address this challenge, NIST is working with the
cryptographic community to solicit, evaluate, and standardize lightweight cryptographic
algorithms that are suitable for use in constrained environments where the requirements
and performance of the current NIST cryptographic standards is not acceptable. NIST
published a call for algorithms to be considered for lightweight cryptographic standards
in FY 2019.
In FY 2019, NIST also announced the publication of NISTIR 8268, Status Report on the
First Round of the NIST Lightweight Cryptography Standardization Process [17]. This
report described the application of a public, competition-like process to select one or
more authenticated encryption and hashing schemes that are suitable for constrained
environments. NIST received 57 candidate algorithms for consideration, of which 56
were accepted as first-round candidates. NISTIR 8268 describes the evaluation criteria
and selection process based on public feedback and an internal review of the candidates
and provides the list of 32 candidate algorithms selected for the second round of the
evaluation process. (See https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/lightweight-cryptography/
round-2-candidates.) NIST continued public collaboration on the topic in its third
gathering at the Lightweight Cryptography Workshop in Gaithersburg, MD, where the
candidate algorithms, including their design strategies, implementations, performance,
cryptanalysis, and target applications.


Transition to FIPS 140-3
In FY 2019, NIST continued to develop
new tools and processes to support an
ISO-based cryptographic module testing
program as a validation authority while
supporting the existing validation process.
For more than a quarter century, NIST’s
Federal Information Processing Standard
(FIPS) 140 publication series has been
used to coordinate the requirements and                           CREDIT: Shutterstock / Victor Moussa

standards of cryptographic modules for
use by U.S. agencies.
On March 22, 2019, the Secretary of Commerce approved FIPS 140-3, Security
Requirements for Cryptographic Modules. The update to FIPS 140 includes references                       15
to two existing international standards: ISO/IEC 19790:2012, Information technology—

                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     FOCUS AREA 3



     Security techniques—Security requirements for cryptographic modules, and ISO/
     IEC 24759:2017, Information technology—Security techniques—Test requirements for
     cryptographic modules.
     In support of this update, NIST developed a series of draft NIST Special Publications (the
     SP 800-140x “subseries”) for public comment. They directly support FIPS 140-3 and its
     associated program, the Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP):
       •    Draft SP 800-140, FIPS 140-3 Derived Test Requirements (DTR)
       •    Draft SP 800-140A, CMVP Documentation Requirements
       •    Draft SP 800-140B, CMVP Security Policy Requirements
       •    Draft SP 800-140C, CMVP Approved Security Functions
       •    Draft SP 800-140D, CMVP Approved Sensitive Parameter Generation and
            Establishment Methods
       •    Draft SP 800-140E, CMVP Approved Authentication Mechanisms
       •    Draft SP 800-140F, CMVP Approved Non-Invasive Attack Mitigation Test Metrics
     NIST has determined a transition timeline for the implementation of the new standard, as
     described in Table 1: Timeline for Implementation of FIPS 140-3 Submissions.

                      Table 1: Timeline for Implementation of FIPS 140-3 Submissions

           DATE                                       ACTIVITY
      Mar 2019      FIPS 140-3 Approved
      Sep 2019      FIPS 140-3 Effective Date
      Oct 2019      Drafts of SP 800-140x for public comment
      Mar 2020      Publication of SP 800-140x documents
                    Implementation Guidance updates
                    Tester competency exam updated
                    Updated CMVP Program Management Manual
      Sep 2020      CMVP accepts FIPS 140-3 submissions
      Sep 2021      CMVP stops accepting FIPS 140-2 submissions for new
                      validation certificates
      Sep 2026      Remaining FIPS 140-2 certificates moved to the Historical List




16


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                    CREDIT: Shutterstock / Virrage Images



FOCUS AREATHIS
           4: ADVANCED         CYBERSECURITY
               PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

RESEARCH & APPLICATIONS DEVELOPMENT
NIST’s cybersecurity research and applications development activities include identifying
emerging and high-priority technologies, developing security solutions that will have a
high impact on the U.S. critical information infrastructure, and developing and showing
how to manage foundational building-block security mechanisms and techniques that
can be integrated into an organization’s mission-critical information systems.


Enabling Forensic Analysis Using Hypervisor Vulnerabilities Data
Virtualization drives much of today’s computing, and a basic component of that is the
use of hypervisors—the software, firmware, or hardware that creates and runs many
virtual machines. Because of the role that hypervisors play in critical technology such as
cloud computing, they are often the target of attacks. To help address this need, NIST
has developed a methodology to enable forensic analysis on attacks on hypervisors. Two
open-source hypervisors—Xen and Kernel-based Virtual Machine (KVM)—were chosen as
platforms to illustrate the methodology by analyzing the most recent vulnerability data
from NIST’s National Vulnerability Database (NVD). The vulnerabilities were classified in
terms of hypervisor functionality, attack type, and attack source. Based on the relative
distribution of vulnerabilities in a hypervisor functionality, sample attacks were launched
to exploit vulnerabilities in the target hypervisor functionality, and the associated system
calls were logged. The gaps in evidence data that is required for fully detecting and
reconstructing those attacks were identified, and techniques required to gather missing
                                                                                                            17


                               NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     FOCUS AREA 4



     evidence were incorporated during subsequent attack runs, essentially performing an
     iterative process.


     Cybersecurity Framework Smart Grid Profile
     In FY 2019, engineers from NIST’s EL and ITL developed an example Smart Grid
     implementation of a NIST Cybersecurity Framework Profile. The Smart Grid Profile
     applies risk management strategies from the Cybersecurity Framework to the smart
     grid and serves as a foundation for refinements to support new grid architectures. The
     Profile provides cybersecurity risk management guidance to power system owners and
     operators by prioritizing cybersecurity activities based on their effectiveness in helping
     achieve common high-level business objectives for the smart grid. The Profile also
     provides a list of considerations relevant to the challenges that power system owners
     and operators may experience as they implement these cybersecurity activities in
     infrastructures with high concentrations of distributed energy resources. The results were
     published in NIST Technical Note 2051, Cybersecurity Framework Smart Grid Profile [18].


     Security Aspects of Electronic Voting
     The Help America Vote Act of 2002 (HAVA)1 encourages the upgrading of voting
     equipment across the United States and has established the Election Assistance
     Commission (EAC)2 and the Technical Guidelines Development Committee (TGDC).3
     NIST chairs the TGDC and provides technical support related to human factors, security,
     and laboratory accreditation. In FY 2019, NIST developed the Voluntary Voting System
     Guidelines 2.0 (VVSG 2.0) for national-level voting system standards. VVSG 2.0 is a
     recommendation from the Technical Guidelines Development Committee (TGDC) to the
     Election Assistance Commission (EAC) for a voting system standard written to address
     the next generation of voting equipment.
     In FY 2019, NIST provided technical leadership to create an Election Profile of the
     Cybersecurity Framework in partnership with the Department of Homeland Security
     (DHS) and the private sector chair of the DHS Sector Coordinating Committee.
     The Election Profile will serve as a one-stop cybersecurity playbook that matches
     cybersecurity requirements with operational methodologies across all election
     processes, from voter registration through election reporting and auditing. The profile
     can be used by Secretaries of State and state and local election officials to identify
     and prioritize opportunities to improve their cybersecurity posture. NIST has provided
     training on the NIST Cybersecurity Framework and profile development and plans to
     hold future workshops to identify election processes and assets that need protection,



     1
         Help America Vote Act of 2002 (HAVA), https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/hava
     2
         U.S. Election Assistance Commission, https://www.eac.gov/
18   3
         Technical Guidelines Development Committee, https://www.eac.gov/about/technical-guidelines-development-
         committee/


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                            FOCUS AREA 4



threats from foreign control of technology vendors, available safeguards, techniques that
can detect incidents, and methods to respond and recover.


Secure Blockchain Technologies and Algorithms
While many individuals recognize blockchain technology by its role in enabling
cryptocurrency (a digital form of currency protected through cryptographic
mechanisms), the technology has many applications and can be used to help protect
information, enable identity management, and enable purchasing supply chain
improvements. In FY 2019, NIST continued to discover and document ways in which
the secure use of blockchain technology can enable new applications and capabilities.
Publications that NIST developed as technical foundations to advance blockchain
research and use included:
  •   NISTIR 8202, Blockchain Technology Overview [19]
  •   Smart Contract Federated Identity Management without Third-Party
      Authentication Services
  •   Augmenting Fiat Currency with an Integrated Managed Cryptocurrency
  •   Implementing a Protocol Native Managed Cryptocurrency
  •   Draft Publication: A Taxonomic Approach to Understanding Emerging Blockchain
      Identity Management Systems
The team also developed new hardware for a blockchain researcher workbench and an
additional blockchain system for deployment. Areas that NIST continues to investigate in
the blockchain technology area include:
  •   Use of a taxonomy for blockchain systems for decentralized identity
  •   Use of tokens on blockchain systems
  •   Creation of tools to enable blockchain technology research
  •   Use of blockchain technology to publicly generate trustworthy random numbers
  •   Development of an architecture to enable the creation of managed
      cryptocurrencies that incorporate security features from consensus currencies
  •   Application of a methodology for securely storing and monitoring the use of
      federally owned crypto-assets on existing cryptocurrency systems
  •   Continued exploration of emerging topics and newly developed and released
      blockchain systems



                                                                                            19


                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                               CREDIT: iStock / alexsl



     FOCUS AREATHIS
                5: IMPROVING        CYBERSECURITY
                    PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

     AWARENESS, TRAINING, AND EDUCATION AND
     WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
     People are often the most underappreciated ingredient in the people, process, and
     technology formula that determines an organization’s readiness to understand and deal
     with cybersecurity challenges. This includes gaps in user and provider awareness about
     how to access cybersecurity guidelines and tools that apply to their own operations
     and environments along with a shortage of people who have the needed cybersecurity
     education, training, and experience.


     National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE)
     Led by NIST, NICE seeks to equip, promote, and
     energize a robust network of organizations that
     address cybersecurity education, training, and
     workforce development. In FY 2019, the NICE
     program celebrated its 10th anniversary. Efforts to
     achieve this goal include: 1) accelerating learning and
     skills development, 2) nurturing a diverse learning
     community, and 3) guiding career development and
     workforce planning to achieve each of the objectives
     identified in the NICE Cybersecurity Workforce
20


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                            FOCUS AREA 5



Framework (see https://www.nist.gov/itl/applied-cybersecurity/nice/nice-framework-
resource-center) [20].
Some of the key accomplishments for NICE during FY 2019 include:
  •   Growth in the National Centers of Academic Excellence in Cybersecurity –
      NIST and NICE support the National Centers of Academic Excellence (CAE) in
      Cybersecurity through a grant that funds the annual CAE Symposium held in
      conjunction with the annual NICE Conference and Expo. During FY 2019, the
      number of CAE institutions grew to 312, with 60 new CAE designations occurring
      during the NICE Conference and Expo. NICE also supports the CAE community
      through participation in and travel to the annual CAE Executive Leadership Forum.
      The National Security Agency and DHS co-lead the CAE Program.
  •   NICE Cybersecurity Workforce Framework Promotion and Alignment – Executive
      Order (EO) 13870, America’s Cybersecurity Workforce, has continued to
      increase awareness about the NICE Framework and encouraging its adoption by
      government, industry, and academia [21]. The EO requires an extension of the NICE
      Framework to federal contractors that provide cybersecurity or IT services to the
      Federal Government and encourages voluntary adoption by nonfederal entities.
      NIST continues to learn about applications and uses of the NICE Framework across
      public and private sectors and expects to use that experience and feedback to
      improve the NICE Framework during FY 2020.
  •   Public Conferences – The NICE team prepared for the 10th Annual NICE
      Conference and Expo and the 5th Annual NICE K12 Cybersecurity Education
      Conference. The broader NICE Conference will be held in Phoenix, Arizona in
      early FY 2020. The next NICE K12 Cybersecurity Education Conference, to be
      held in Garden Grove, California, will support school teachers, administrators,
      non-profit organizations, and others who mentor children and youth interested in
      cybersecurity as a career.
  •   International Engagement – NICE convenes bi-monthly meetings of Five Eyes
      partner countries (Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the
      United States) to learn about each country’s respective initiatives and challenges
      in cybersecurity education and workforce development. NICE also actively
      participates in a working group on Cyber Culture and Skills of the Global Forum
      for Cyber Expertise (GFCE). NICE staff presented on the topic of “Workforce
      Development Frameworks” at the GFCE Annual Meeting in Ethiopia. NICE also
      coordinated a four-day International Workshop on Cybersecurity Education and
      Workforce Development Capacity Building in Germany.




                                                                                           21


                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     FOCUS AREA 5



     Increasing Awareness of Cybersecurity Resources
     A major element of NIST’s work in information security involves the publication of
     cybersecurity and privacy documents as well as engagement with public and private-
     sector communities. FY 2019 activities to increase and improve awareness included:
         •   The Computer Security Resource Center (CSRC), one of the most visited websites
             at NIST, provides a central resource for NIST cybersecurity and privacy publications,
             standards, and guidelines. The purpose of the CSRC is to encourage the broad
             sharing of information security tools and practices, provide a resource for
             information security standards and guidelines, and identify and link key security
             resources to support the industry. In FY 2019, the CSRC was updated to provide an
             enhanced search capability and a more consistent and modernized user interface.
         •   Cybersecurity for Small Businesses supports the small and medium-sized
             businesses (SMBs) that represent approximately 95% of all businesses and are
             often considered to be the backbone of the U.S. economy.4 Typically faced with
             limited budgets, SMBs need practical resources that enable them to understand
             and cost-effectively address their cybersecurity risks. NIST has been working on
             behalf of SMBs for many years, together with interagency and industry partners
             and collaborators. The NIST Small Business Cybersecurity Act codified the
             Institute’s focus on small businesses. Specifically, the statute directed NIST to
             “disseminate clear and concise resources to help small business concerns identify,
             assess, manage, and reduce their cybersecurity risks.” In FY 2018, the NIST Small
             Business Outreach Program began updating the Small Business Cybersecurity
             Corner website to make resources easier to find and use (https://www.nist.gov/
             itl/smallbusinesscyber). In FY 2019, those training materials and accompanying
             resources have been expanded, based on cybersecurity resources and feedback
             received from NIST’s federal partners and the public.
         •   The Federal Computer Security Program Managers (FCSM) Forum is an important
             component of improving cybersecurity awareness, training, and workforce
             development. FCSM is an informal NIST-sponsored group that promotes the sharing
             of system security information among U.S. federal, state, and higher education
             organizations. In FY 2019, FCSM conducted three half-day quarterly meetings and
             hosted a annual two-day off-site meeting to discuss current issues and items of
             interest with those responsible for protecting non-national security systems.




     4
         The most recent data from the U.S. Census Bureau, Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS) Firm and Establishment
22       Data Tables, shows that 95.52 % of “firms” have between 1 and 49 employees and could be considered by many
         to be SMBs.


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                              FOCUS AREA 5



Advancing Cybersecurity Usability
ITL’s Visualization and Usability Group performs research to develop user-centered
measurement and evaluation methods, guidelines, and standards by applying human
factors, cognitive science, user-centered designs, and usability principles to improve
interactions between humans and systems. In FY 2019, notable usability projects included:
  •   Human Factors in Smart Home Technologies – NIST conducted a one-day
      workshop entitled “Human Factors in Smart Home Technologies.” Inspired by
      the team’s smart home research, the workshop addressed the human aspects of
      smart home devices, including usability, user perceptions, and end-user privacy
      and security considerations. Invited speakers from industry, academia, and the
      government provided their perspectives via presentations and a moderated
      panel. The attendees also had the opportunity to influence NIST’s future research
      direction in this area by voicing their opinions, challenges, and ideas during
      breakout sessions.
  •   Rating Human Phishing Message Detection Difficulty – NIST also developed the
      “Phish Scale” as a tool to better characterize an organization’s phishing risk.
      The scale considers phishing cues and user context to help Chief Information
      Security Officers and phishing training implementers to rate the difficulty of their
      organization’s phishing exercises and explain associated click rates. Research
      results were shared with industry, academia, and government representatives at
      multiple security forums and will be published in the Journal of Cybersecurity.
  •   Understanding Youth Cybersecurity Practices and Perceptions – Cybersecurity
      for young people remains an important area of study for NIST. In FY 2019, NIST
      completed a study to understand a child’s password practices and perceptions.
      Children use technology from a very young age and often have to authenticate
      themselves. Yet very little attention has been paid to designing authentication
      methods specifically for this particular target group. The usual practice is to
      deploy the ubiquitous password, and this might well be a suboptimal choice.
      Designing authentication for children requires acknowledgement of child-
      specific developmental challenges related to literacy, cognitive abilities, and
      differing developmental stages. Understanding current security practices is
      essential to delivering insights that can inform the development of child-centered
      authentication mechanisms and processes. NIST conducted a systematic review of
      twenty years of research related to children and authentication, noting a research
      gap regarding the creation and use of passwords. This finding led to a survey
      of U.S. school children to gain insights into their current password usage and
      behaviors. The team analyzed password survey responses collected from more
      than 1500 students in grades 3 to 12. The results were published in the Journal
      of Cybersecurity. The ultimate goal of the research is the development of useful
      guidance to help educators, parents, and youth understand the best practices for
      passwords and online security and privacy.
                                                                                             23


                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                                               CREDIT: Shutterstock / nmedia



     FOCUS AREATHIS
                6: ENHANCING         IDENTITY
                    PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

     AND ACCESS MANAGEMENT
     Properly managing access to systems, processes, and information is central to managing
     cybersecurity risks and a priority for NIST’s cybersecurity and privacy program. NIST
     engages and collaborates with standards bodies and consortia such as the International
     Organization for Standardization (ISO),5 the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF),6 the
     Fast IDentity Online (FIDO) Alliance,7 the Open Identity Federation (OIF), and the Kantara
     Initiative8 to document and advance the various methods for ensuring reliable and secure
     identity and access management. NIST began the development of the Identity and Access
     Management Resource Center in FY 2019. This virtual resource center was designed to
     share NIST’s efforts to strengthen the security, privacy, usability, and interoperability of
     identity and access management solutions and includes convenient links and details
     relative to NIST identity projects across the entire organization.


     Digital Identity Guidelines
     Federal agencies and industry have had over two years of experience in assimilating,
     adopting, and implementing the controls and requirements of the four-volume set of
     digital identity publications: NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-63-3, Digital Identity

     5
         International Organization for Standardization (ISO), https://www.iso.org/home.html
     6
         Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), https://www.ietf.org/about/
24   7
         Fast IDentity Online Alliance (FIDO), https://fidoalliance.org/
     8
         Kantara Initiative, https://kantarainitiative.org/


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                                             FOCUS AREA 6



Guidelines; SP 800-63A, Enrollment and Identity Proofing; SP 800-63B, Authentication
and Lifecycle Management; and, SP 800-63C, Federation and Assertions [22]. SP 800-
63-3 represented a major update to the previous SP 800-63-2 standard and advanced
new approaches for componentization, assurance levels, authenticators, federation, and
privacy considerations. There has been widespread interest, analysis, and adoption by
industry and international standards organizations of SP 800-63-3 for its concepts and
guidance, control requirements, and application of the Risk Management Framework
to identity management systems. During FY 2019, NIST has been working closely with
federal agencies and industry for the implementation of the standard. Questions and
issues are publicly posted on NIST Pages (see https://pages.nist.gov/800-63-FAQ/) and
as open issues on GitHub (see https://github.com/usnistgov/800-63-3/issues).
OMB Policy Memorandum M-19-17 updated federal identity, credentials, and access
management policy and provided direction for federal agencies to enhance associated
capabilities [23]. In response, NIST established the Identity and Access Management
(IAM) Resource Center, which provides information and resources for NIST IAM9
activities. The IAM Resource Center includes a roadmap of major NIST projects and
activities. The roadmap presents NIST plans to update SP 800-63-3 in order to build on
the feedback already received, starting with a formal request for comments in the third
quarter of FY 2020.
M-19-17 assigned to NIST the responsibility for developing conformance criteria for the
accreditation of products and services to meet designated levels of assurance in SP 800-
63-3. In response, NIST explored various conformance regimes that might be leveraged
so that the conformance criteria could be developed in the most appropriate fashion. The
conformance criteria present all normative requirements and controls of SP 800-63-3 by
designated assurance level. These include conformance assessment objectives for each
criterion, recommended methods for determining conformity with the requirements, and
supplemental guidance to assist implementers and assessors to achieve and determine
conformity. The conformance criteria are intended for federal agencies and industry
service providers for their specific implementations and risk and security assessments
under FISMA.

Personal Identity Verification (PIV)
As required by Homeland Security Presidential Directive 12, NIST developed and
maintains the FIPS for personal identity verification (PIV) of federal employees and
contractors (FIPS 201). In FY 2019, NIST initiated the revision of FIPS 201 with the goals
of incorporating the new or changing business requirements of federal departments and
agencies, adapting to changes in the environment and technology, and aligning with
M-19-17. The revision activities began with a business requirement meeting to engage
with federal stakeholders about the revision goals. Based on the engagement, NIST
aims to expand the set of PIV authenticators beyond the current practices (including

                                                                                                            25
9
    NIST Identity and Access Management, https://www.nist.gov/topics/identity-access-management


                                     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     FOCUS AREA 6



     the current smart card form factor) while addressing interagency use of new types of
     PIV authenticators (i.e., derived PIV credentials) via federation. The revision also aims to
     facilitate the issuance of PIV Cards by enabling remote identity proofing. These changes
     closely align with M-19-17. The PIV team actively worked on drafting a candidate public
     draft of the updated FIPS 201-3 while continuing outreach to federal stakeholders.




26


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                   CREDIT: Shutterstock / metamorworks



FOCUS AREATHIS
           7: BOLSTERING         COMMUNICATIONS
               PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

AND INFRASTRUCTURE PROTECTION
NIST works with industry to develop the measurement science and standards necessary
to ensure the robustness, scalability, and security of important infastructures, including
mobile telecommunications networks and the global internet. Research focuses on the
measurement and modeling techniques necessary to understand, predict, and control
the behavior of internet-scale networked information systems. The NIST staff uses these
insights to guide the design, analysis, and standardization of new technologies aimed at
improving the robustness and reliability of the global communications infrastructure.
Much of the research and industry collaboration occurs at NIST’s National Cybersecurity
Center of Excellence (NCCoE). As shown in Figure 2 below and in the accomplishments
described in this focus area, the center represents the significant benefit of government-
industry partnership.




                                                                                                         27


                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     FOCUS AREA 7




                                  Figure 2: Selected Impacts of NCCoE



     Securing Cellular and Mobile Technologies
     Some of the most exciting advances in technology are those involving mobile
     networking and communications. Cellular technologies are increasing in bandwidth
     capabilities as they evolve from 3rd generation (3G) to 4th generation (4G), Long Term
     Evolution (LTE) and, 5th generation (5G) technologies. The mobile technologies that
     leverage this infrastructure are becoming more powerful and offering more services
     to consumers. NIST is working to ensure that these technologies have the necessary
     security and privacy capabilities to be reliable and trustworthy.
     In FY 2019, NIST continued its participation in the 3rd Generation Partnership Project
     (3GPP) that unites telecommunications standard development organizations in
     maintaining and advancing cellular telecommunications technologies (including radio
     access and core network and service capabilities) to enable and improve mobile
     telecommunications. 3GPP specifications and studies are contribution-driven by member
     companies in Working Groups and at the Technical Specification Group level. NIST
     participation in 3GPP activities helps to ensure compatibility for legacy technology
     and helps in the development of standards for the next generation (e.g., 5G) cellular
28   technologies.


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                               FOCUS AREA 7



NIST published a practice guide–SP 1800-21, Mobile Device Security: Corporate-owned
Personally-Enabled (COPE)–for public comment [24]. The goal of the COPE project was
to provide an example solution that demonstrates how organizations can use a standards-
based approach and commercially available technologies to meet their security needs
for using mobile devices to access enterprise resources. Usability, privacy, and regulatory
requirements influence which mobile security technologies and security controls are going
to be well-suited to meet the needs of an organization’s mobility program. The sample
solution provides the details of tools for an enterprise mobility management (EMM)
capability located on-premises, including mobile threat defense (MTD), mobile threat
intelligence (MTI), application vetting, secure boot/image authentication, and virtual
private network (VPN) services. (See https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/building-
blocks/mobile-device-security/corporate-owned-personally-enabled.)

Advancing 5G Security
As the next generation of mobile broadband technology—the 5th Generation, or 5G—is
deployed in our nation and across the world, there is great promise of positive change
in the way humans and machines communicate, operate, and interact in the physical
and virtual world. With cellular technology becoming the primary way that devices
are connected, it is imperative for organizations to understand and address the risks
associated with the use of these technologies. As industry embarks on ubiquitous 5G
deployments, there are opportunities to take advantage of the various cybersecurity
technologies and capabilities that are available today. 5G introduces the concept of
a service-based architecture for the first time in cellular networks. This design has
fundamental impacts on the way network services are created and how the individual
network functions communicate. Not only is the core network decomposed into smaller
functional elements, but the communication between these elements is also expected
to be more flexible—routed via a common service bus and deployed using virtualization
technologies. It is envisioned that 5G network components are deployed on a hyper-
scalable, containerized, and virtualized infrastructure. While this is not the only approach
for 5G deployments, this infrastructure is a fundamental building block of 5G that
operators and manufacturers can adopt to meet the customers’ demands of modern
use cases. Secure deployment of the core network and radio access network services
on cloud-like infrastructures constitutes a foundational element of both commercial and
private 5G networks.
In FY 2019, NIST hosted a public workshop on 5G cybersecurity at the NCCoE. The purpose
of the workshop was to explore the practical and implementable cybersecurity capabilities
delivered by 5G systems, identify existing industry recommended practices for securing
the supporting infrastructure and technologies, and understand the potential opportunities
and challenges that affect the 5G evolution. The findings from this workshop will inform
the development of potential NCCoE demonstration projects to leverage 5G cybersecurity
capabilities and supporting technologies to protect the cellular communications network
and secure the core 5G underlying infrastructure and services.
                                                                                               29


                               NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     FOCUS AREA 7



     During the workshop, NIST introduced some notional ideas of a high-level reference
     architecture, supporting components of 5G deployments, and a proposed preliminary
     approach for gathering existing cybersecurity guidance to develop practical practices
     that can be applied as potential NCCoE demonstration projects.


     National Public Safety Broadband Network (NPSBN)
     Federal statutes direct NIST to conduct research and development that support the
     acceleration and advancement of a nationwide broadband network that will help police,
     firefighters, emergency medical service professionals, and other public safety officials
     stay safe and do their jobs. Having a common and reliable National Public Safety
     Broadband Network (NPSBN) enables these officials to effectively communicate and
     conduct their missions. In FY 2019, NIST continued to research and advance methods
     and guidelines for this community, including:
       •   Publication of draft NISTIR 8196, Security Analysis of First Responder Mobile
           and Wearable Devices, which reviews the current and potential use cases of
           these mobile and wearable devices by ﬁrst responders and analyzes them from a
           cybersecurity perspective [25]. The goals of this analysis were to enable industry
           to design and produce more secure public safety devices and to assist jurisdictions
           in identifying security objectives and selecting secure devices.
       •   Collaboration with the NIST Public Safety Communications Research (PSCR)
           Division’s prize challenge. Contestants explored whether mobile Subscriber
           Identity Module (SIM) cards could be used as storage containers for public
           safety mobile application credentials. PSCR reached out to providers globally to
           participate in a competition aimed at improving public safety operations through
           innovative improvements to SIM card functionality. The goals of this research
           were to raise awareness of the need for convenient, standards-based, two-factor
           authentication for emergency responders while demonstrating an innovative
           approach to authentication that could lead to future innovations.
       •   NCCoE released a second draft of NIST Cybersecurity Practice Guide SP 1800-13,
           Mobile Application Single Sign-On: Improving Authentication for Public Safety
           First Responders [26]. This revision of the guide was updated at the request of the
           public safety community to incorporate iOS version 12.

     Zero Trust Architecture
     Zero Trust is the term for an evolving set of cybersecurity paradigms that move
     network defenses from static, network-based perimeters to focus on users, assets, and
     resources. A zero trust architecture (ZTA) uses zero trust principles to plan the enterprise
     infrastructure and workflows. Zero trust assumes that there is no implicit trust granted
     to assets or user accounts based solely on their physical or network location (i.e., local
     area networks versus the internet). Authentication and authorization (both user and
30
     device) are discrete functions performed before a session with an enterprise resource


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                                FOCUS AREA 7



is established. Zero trust is a response to enterprise network trends that include remote
users and cloud-based assets that are not located within an enterprise-owned network
boundary. Zero trust focuses on protecting resources rather than network segments,
as the network location is no longer considered the prime component to the security
posture of the resource. NIST has published Draft SP 800-207, Zero Trust Architecture,
which discusses the core logical components that make up a zero trust architecture
(ZTA) network strategy [27]. Draft SP 800-207 contains a definition of zero trust
architecture (ZTA) and gives general deployment models and use cases where zero trust
could improve an enterprise’s overall information technology security posture.


Improving Security Hygiene
There are a relatively small number of root causes for many data breaches, malware
infections, and other security incidents. Implementing a few simple practices can
address those root causes to prevent many incidents from occurring and to lower the
potential impact of incidents that still occur. In other words, security hygiene practices
make it harder for attackers to succeed and reduces the damage that they can cause.
Unfortunately, security hygiene is easier said than done. For example, IT professionals
have known for decades that patching software (e.g., operating systems, applications, and
the like) eliminates known vulnerabilities. Though there is widespread recognition that
patching can be incredibly effective at mitigating security risk, patching is often resource-
intensive, and the act of patching itself can reduce system and service availability.
Installing software updates (i.e., patching) is a particularly important component of cyber
hygiene, but existing tools are insufficient for many environments and situations. For
example, many organizations lack tools to help them measure and assess the effectiveness
and timeliness of their patching efforts. Many organizations also struggle to prioritize
patching efforts, test patches before deployment, and adhere to policies for how quickly
patches need to be applied in different situations. How, when, and what to patch can be
difficult decisions for any organization. Each organization must balance security with
mission impact and business objectives and figure out their risk tolerance for each. Recent
cybersecurity attacks have highlighted the dangers of having equipment that has not been
patched. Even with recent events and the historical attacks that have been successfully
carried out due to unpatched systems, patching remains a problem.
The NCCoE launched a project to demonstrate an approach for improving enterprise
patching practices for general IT systems. In this project, commercial and open-source
tools will be used to address the most challenging aspects of patching, including
system characterization and prioritization, patch testing, and patch implementation
tracking and verification. These tools are accompanied by actionable, prescriptive
guidance on establishing policies and processes for the entire patching life cycle. For
example, roles and responsibilities are defined for all affected personnel, and a playbook
is established with rapid mitigation actions for destructive malware outbreaks that
organizations can tactically execute in the first 30 days as well as recommendations
that can be implemented strategically beyond 30 days. This project has resulted in              31


                               NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     FOCUS AREA 7



     the NIST Cybersecurity Practice Guide, Critical Cybersecurity Hygiene: Patching The
     Enterprise, that will be released in FY 2020. This report provides practical steps needed
     to implement a cybersecurity reference design that addresses this challenge.

     Secure Inter-Domain Routing (SIDR)
     Most of the routing infrastructure that underpins the internet currently lacks basic
     security services. In most cases, internet traffic must transit multiple networks before
     reaching its destination. Each network implicitly trusts other networks to provide, via the
     Border Gateway Protocol (BGP), the accurate information necessary to correctly route
     traffic across the internet. When that information is inaccurate, traffic will take inefficient
     paths through the internet, potentially arriving at malicious sites that masquerade as
     legitimate destinations or never arriving at its intended destination at all.
     In FY 2019, NIST researchers collaborated at the NCCoE to demonstrate the ability of a
     technique known as BGP route origin validation (ROV) to protect against route hijacking.
     This project culminated in an NCCoE practice guide, NIST SP 1800-14, Protecting the
     Integrity of Internet Routing: Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Route Origin Validation,
     which provided an example implementation that demonstrated the use of BGP ROV
     in realistic deployment scenarios; developed detailed deployment guidance; addressed
     implementation and use issues; and generated best practices and lessons learned [28].
     This resource is intended to improve the security and stability of the global internet
     by allowing networks to verify the validity of BGP routing information and strengthen
     the security and stability of traffic flowing across the global internet—benefitting all
     organizations and individuals that use and rely on it.


     Transport Layer Security (TLS)
     Transport Layer Security (TLS) is a cryptographic protocol that is designed to provide
     privacy and data integrity between two or more communicating computer applications
     over a computer network. TLS is widely used in many common applications, including
     web browsing, email, instant messaging, and Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP).
     Websites often use TLS to secure communications between servers and web browsers.
     In FY 2019, the NCCoE initiated a project that uses commercially available technologies
     to demonstrate how medium and large enterprises that rely on Transport Layer Security
     (TLS) can secure both customer-facing and internal applications to manage TLS server
     certificates better by:
       •   Defining operational and security policies and identifying roles and responsibilities;
       •   Establishing comprehensive certificate inventories and ownership tracking;
       •   Conducting a continuous monitoring of certificate operational and security status;

32


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                            FOCUS AREA 7



  •   Automating certificate management to minimize human error and maximize
      efficiency on a large scale; and
  •   Enabling rapid migration to new certificates and keys when cryptographic
      mechanisms are found to be weak, compromised, or vulnerable.
The project will result in actionable guidance to help enterprises establish and implement
a TLS server certificate management program.




                                                                                             33


                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                           CREDIT: Shutterstock / jamesteohart


     FOCUS AREATHIS
                8: SECURING        EMERGING
                    PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

     TECHNOLOGIES
     NIST has maintained a long-standing commitment to advancing innovation and to
     supporting cybersecurity and privacy research in emerging technologies and priorities,
     such as artificial intelligence and the Internet of Things (IoT). With a dedicated technical
     staff, one-of-a-kind facilities, and NIST’s trusted, objective, non-regulatory role, NIST is
     well-positioned to help the Nation and its partners advance in these promising areas.


     Cybersecurity for the Internet of Things (IoT)
     NIST’s Cybersecurity for the Internet of Things (IoT) program supports the development
     and application of standards, guidelines, and related tools to improve the cybersecurity
     of connected devices and the environments in which they are deployed. By collaborating
     with stakeholders across government, industry, international bodies, and academia, the
     program aims to cultivate trust and foster an environment that enables innovation on a
     global scale.
     Accomplishments of the NIST IoT program in FY 2019 included:
       •   Publication of the Final NISTIR 8228, Considerations for Managing Internet of
           Things (IoT) Cybersecurity and Privacy Risks, which provides guidance for federal
           agencies and other organizations to better understand and manage the risks
           associated with individual IoT devices throughout the life cycles of those devices
           [6]. It addresses three high-level goals for risk mitigation: device security, data
34


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                               FOCUS AREA 8



      security, and individual privacy. This introductory report provides the foundation
      for a planned series of publications on more specific aspects of this topic.
  •   Publication of Draft NISTIR 8259, Core Cybersecurity Feature Baseline for
      Securable IoT Devices: A Starting Point for IoT Device Manufacturers [29].
      This NISTIR defines a baseline of cybersecurity features that manufacturers
      may voluntarily adopt for the IoT devices that they produce. It also provides
      information on how manufacturers can identify and implement features beyond
      the baseline that are most appropriate for their customers.
  •   Publication of Draft NISTIR 8267, Security Review of Consumer Home Internet
      of Things (IoT) Products, which presents the results of technical assessments on
      the security features of various “smart” products (e.g., smart light bulbs, security
      cameras, and doorbells) [30]. The report provides recommendations, information
      on the observations of the devices’ security features, current practices, and the
      means by which these current practices could be improved. These technical
      assessments will help the NCCoE better address consumer home IoT security in a
      holistic manner in future projects.


Federal Engagement for Artificial Intelligence
As artificial intelligence (AI) is rapidly transforming our world, remarkable surges
in AI capabilities have led to a number of innovations. New AI-enabled systems are
revolutionizing everything from commerce and healthcare to transportation and
cybersecurity. Because AI has the potential to impact nearly all aspects of our society
including our economy, AI must be developed in a trustworthy manner to ensure
reliability, safety, and accuracy.
Drawing upon NIST’s long-standing reputation for cultivating trust in technology, the
NIST staff is helping to ensure the public trust of rapidly evolving technologies, including
the development of rigorous and scientific testing that ensures safe and trustworthy AI.
Our progress includes:
  •   Participation in interagency efforts to further innovate AI. NIST Director and
      Undersecretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology Walter Copan serves
      on the White House Select Committee on Artificial Intelligence. Charles Romine,
      the Director of NIST’s ITL, serves on the Machine Learning and AI Subcommittee.
  •   Creation of a plan in response to Executive Order 13859, Maintaining American
      Leadership in Artificial Intelligence, for prioritizing federal agency engagement in
      the development of standards for AI [31]. The plan recommends that the Federal
      Government “commit to deeper, consistent, long-term engagement” in activities
      to help the United States speed the pace of reliable, robust, and trustworthy AI
      technology development; bolster AI standards-related knowledge, leadership, and
      coordination among agencies that develop or use AI; promote focused research on
                                                                                               35


                               NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     FOCUS AREA 8



           the trustworthiness of AI systems; support and expand public-private partnerships;
           and engage with international parties.
       •   NIST published draft NISTIR 8269, A Taxonomy and Terminology of Adversarial
           Machine Learning, in FY 2019 as a step toward securing applications of AI,
           specifically adversarial machine learning (AML), and features a taxonomy of
           concepts and terminologies [32]. This NISTIR can inform future standards and best
           practices for assessing and managing machine learning security by establishing a
           common language and understanding of the rapidly developing AML landscape.
     NIST is also supporting fundamental research to measure and enhance the security
     and explainability of AI systems and advancing the application of AI to NIST metrology
     problems by bolstering AI expertise at NIST and enabling NIST scientists to draw
     routinely on machine learning and AI tools to gain a deeper insight into their research.
     NIST launched the AI Visiting Fellow program, which brings nationally recognized leaders
     in AI and machine learning to NIST to share their knowledge and experience and provide
     technical support.
     NIST research in AI is focused on how to measure and enhance the security and
     trustworthiness of AI systems. This includes participation in the development of
     international standards that ensure innovation, public trust, and confidence in systems
     that use AI technologies. In addition, NIST is applying AI to measurement problems to
     gain deeper insight into the research itself as well as to better understand AI’s capabilities
     and limitations. In FY 2019, the NCCoE also began developing a testbed to research and
     develop metrics and best practices to assess the vulnerabilities of AI models.




36


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                        CREDIT: Shutterstock / kentoh



FOCUS AREATHIS
           9: ADVANCING         SECURITY
               PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY          TEST
                                     LEFT BLANK

AND MEASUREMENT TOOLS
Federal agencies, industry, and the public rely on many elements of software and
technology for the protection of information and communications used in electronic
commerce, the critical infrastructure, and other application areas. This reliance depends
on the effective measurement and conformance testing of the standards being applied.
In FY 2019, NIST continued to create reference data, offer guidance, and participate
in international engagement for the development of flexible, open standards. These
efforts will be continued in FY 2020 as NIST seeks to improve the interoperability, broad
acceptance, and adoption of security automation solutions to address the current and
future security challenges. In turn, this will create opportunities for innovation.


Automated Combinatorial Testing
As important as software is to modern, complex information and technology systems,
that complexity makes it difficult and expensive to conduct adequate vulnerability
testing in a timely manner. Engineers often encounter security failures that result from
unexpected interactions among components. If all faults in a system can be triggered
by applying test methods that combine a known number of parameters, then testing
all possible combinations of those parameters with a practical number of tests can
provide strong fault detection efficiency. These methods are being applied to software

                                                                                                        37


                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     FOCUS AREA 9



     and hardware testing for reliability, safety, and security.10 NIST’s focus is on empirical
     test results and their impact on real-world problems. In FY 2019, NIST was able to
     advance such testing by developing and demonstrating methods for generating very
     large (> 2000 variables) test arrays. This tool is being applied by industry to evaluate
     the quality of their test suites for commercial products. NIST also conducted a joint
     project with Idaho National Labs and Virginia Commonwealth University to demonstrate
     combinatorial methods for software assurance in reactor safety systems as well as
     a similar project with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to
     demonstrate combinatorial coverage measurement for spacecraft software assurance.


     National Vulnerability Database (NVD)
     How does a system administrator know if some of the hardware or software in their
     systems contain vulnerabilities? Chances are that they utilize information that is freely
     available from the NVD. The NVD is a comprehensive cybersecurity vulnerability
     database that tracks vulnerability discovery trends over time, enabling users to
     assess changes in vulnerability discovery rates within specific products or types of
     vulnerabilities. The NVD includes databases of security configuration checklists for the
     National Checklist Program (NCP), which is comprised of listings of publicly known
     software flaws, product names, and impact metrics.
     NVD data is represented using the Secure Content Automation Protocol (SCAP)
     specifications. The use of SCAP data by the commercial security products deployed in
     thousands of organizations worldwide has extended NVD’s effective reach.
     The graphic below demonstrates the significant impact of the NVD and why it is a
     critical element of NIST’s advancement of information security testing, measurement
     science, and conformance. NIST staff have worked diligently to significantly increase the
     information available from the NVD repositories, expand the automated mechanisms
     to access that information, and provide timely evaluations of new and evolving
     vulnerability data. The numbers reflected in this chart illustrate these improvements,
     such as an increase of 556% of modified Common Vulnerability Enumeration (CVE)
     analysis compared to 2018, 160% increase in the listed Common Platform Enumeration
     (CPE) platforms, and considerable reduction of the historical backlog of CVEs waiting to
     be processed.




38   10
          Automated Combinatorial Testing for Software, https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/automated-combinatorial-testing-
          for-software


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                             FOCUS AREA 9




                       Figure 3: Selected FY 2019 NVD Accomplishments

Several strategies to gain efficiencies, provide better value, and meet future demands are
planned for the NVD in FY 2020. Improvements in tools and workflow for the analysts
are continuously being developed, and the team intends to implement the allowlisting
of CVE Naming Authorities (CNAs). This would allow some CNAs to provide their own
analyses of CVEs, and after internal review, their scores could automatically be accepted
into the NVD. This process will be further described in NISTIR 8246, National Vulnerability
Database (NVD) Metadata Submission Guidelines for Common Vulnerabilities and
Exposures (CVE) Numbering Authorities (CNAs) and Authorized Data Publishers,
which is expected to be published in FY 2020. The team also plans to implement a
vulnerability ontology (commonly referred to as “vulntology”). This ontology approach
will be published for public comment in FY 2020 and used to determine whether natural
language processing (i.e., AI) will be useful in the future analyses of CVEs.


Open Security Controls Assessment Language (OSCAL)
Today, concepts like security controls and profiles are largely represented in proprietary
ways, making it more difficult for many organizations to move forward as quickly as
they need to in order to take advantage of these approaches. Organizations also often
struggle with information systems that have many different components. To help
                                                                                              39
address these problems, NIST is collaborating with industry to develop the Open Security


                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     FOCUS AREA 9



     Controls Assessment Language (OSCAL). OSCAL is a set of formats expressed in
     eXtensible Markup Language (XML), JavaScript Object Notation (JSON), and YAML Ain’t
     Markup Language (YAML). These formats provide machine-readable representations
     of control catalogs, control baselines, system security plans, assessment plans, and
     results. In FY 2019, NIST continued to develop approaches for security planning and
     measurement through the application of the Cybersecurity Framework for assessments
     and assessment results.


     Cyber Risk Analytics
     This project promotes technical solutions that enable organizations to bridge diverse,
     new, and existing data sets to advance the analysis of cyber risks and enhance the ability
     to report trends. The goal is to enable information sharing among risk owners about
     historical, current, and future cyber risk conditions. NIST is leveraging their past and
     present efforts such as a data repository for cyber incident analysis, predictive analytics
     and strategic analysis on threat coverage, and prioritization and gap identification. In FY
     2019, the program developed methodologies and tools that could be used for developing
     a Collaborative Cyber Incident Data and Analysis Repository (CIDAR)11 that will combine
     data from multiple databases and showcase opportunities for visualizing patterns and
     trends in cyber-related incidents. The methodologies developed also included the
     automation of new data ingestion and predictive functions to match cyber incident
     entries between data sets.


     Computer Forensic Tool Testing (CFTT)
     The Computer Forensics Tool Testing Program (CFTT) is a project of ITL’s Software
     and Systems Division (SSD) and is supported by the Special Programs Office and DHS.
     In FY 2019, several key advances were made to help address a critical need in the law
     enforcement community to ensure the reliability of computer forensic tools.
          •   Specifications and Testing – A new test specification for mobile devices was
              developed: Mobile Device Forensic Tool Specification, Test Assertion, and Test
              Cases. The CFTT project partnered with DHS to test numerous digital forensic
              tools for disk imaging, write-blocking, string searching, windows registry, and
              mobile device acquisition, resulting in 23 published reports.
          •   Federated Testing – Federated testing was developed to enable third parties to
              use the NIST testing methodology in their own labs and produce standardized test
              reports. In FY 2019, Federated Testing v4 was updated to provide modules for disk
              imaging tools, forensic string search tools, hardware write blockers, and mobile
              forensic tools.



40   11
          Enhancing Resilience Through Cyber Incident Data Sharing and Analysis, https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/
          publications/Overcoming%20Perceived%20Obstacles%20White%20Paper_1.pdf


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                             FOCUS AREA 9



  •   Computer Forensic Reference Data Sets (CFReDS) – The CFReDS is a repository of
      various documented sets of digital evidence. In FY 2019, CFReDS was updated to
      include five Joint Test Action Group (JTAG) and nine Chip-Off mobile device binary
      images, string search test data for use with Federated Testing 4.0 and later, and 19
      drone forensic images.
  •   Forensics Tool Catalog – The Forensics Tool Catalog is a web-based community-
      sourced catalog of forensic tools aided by a taxonomy of forensic tools. The
      Tool Catalog grew by two functionalities (Live Response and Incident Response
      Forensic Tracking and Reporting) and 63 new tool entries for a total of 315 tools in
      FY 2019.


National Software Reference Library (NSRL)
The NSRL is designed to collect software from various sources and incorporate the file
profiles computed from this software into a Reference Data Set (RDS) of information.
The RDS can be used by law enforcement, government, and industry to review computer
files by matching file profiles in the RDS. This will help alleviate much of the effort
involved in determining which files are important as evidence on computers or file
systems that have been seized as part of criminal investigations. The NSRL also provides
a research environment to promote the development of new forensics techniques and
other applications in computer science.
In FY 2019, the NSRL published four releases of software metadata and enlarged the
collection to contain a combined total of 544 million files from 30,000 microcomputer
applications; 169,000 mobile device applications; and 3,700 gaming platform
applications. The NSRL was also expanded to include applications that were distributed
through gaming platforms and the profiles obtained from installing and updating
common operating systems.




                                                                                             41


                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     CONCLUSION
     We are very proud of our accomplishments and enjoy sharing the culmination of our
     work with you each year. Our commitment to cultivating trust in information and the
     technology that drives the development and handling of that information is one of our
     top priorities, and we thank you for your continued support in these endeavors.
     As always, NIST welcomes all suggestions for how we can improve our cybersecurity
     work to better serve the public and private sectors. We also warmly welcome you to join
     us in the future as we pick up the pace and work together.




42


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
REFERENCES
[1]   National Institute of Standards and Technology (2019) Security Requirements
      for Cryptographic Modules. (U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, DC),
      Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS) 140-3.
      https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.FIPS.140-3
[2]   Joint Task Force (2018) Risk Management Framework for Information Systems and
      Organizations: A System Life Cycle Approach for Security and Privacy. (National
      Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication
      (SP) 800-37, Rev. 2. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-37r2
[3]   National Institute of Standards and Technology (2018) Framework for Improving
      Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, Version 1.1. (National Institute of Standards and
      Technology, Gaithersburg, MD). https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.CSWP.04162018
[4] National Institute of Standards and Technology (2020) NIST Privacy Framework:
    A Tool for Improving Privacy Through Enterprise Risk Management, Version 1.0.
    (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD).
    https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.CSWP.01162020
[5]   Joint Task Force Transformation Initiative (2013) Security and Privacy Controls for
      Federal Information Systems and Organizations. (National Institute of Standards
      and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-53, Rev. 4,
      Includes updates as of January 22, 2015. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-53r4
[6] Boeckl KR, Fagan MJ, Fisher WM, Lefkovitz NB, Megas KN, Nadeau EM, Piccarreta BM,
    Gabel O’Rourke D, Scarfone KA (2019) Considerations for Managing Internet of
    Things (IoT) Cybersecurity and Privacy Risks. (National Institute of Standards and
    Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Interagency or Internal Report (IR) 8228.
    https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8228
[7]   Stouffer KA, Zimmerman T, Tang C, Lubell J, Cichonski JA, McCarthy J (2019)
      Cybersecurity Framework Manufacturing Profile. (National Institute of Standards
      and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Interagency or Internal Report (IR) 8183,
      Includes updates as of May 20, 2019. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8183
[8] Keller N, Quinn S, Scarfone K, Smith M, Johnson V. (2020). National Cybersecurity
    Online Informative References (OLIR) Program: Guidelines for OLIR Users and
    Developers. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD),
    Draft NIST Internal or Interagency Report (NISTIR) 8278.
    https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8278-draft
[9] Barrett M, Keller N, Quinn S, Smith M. (2019). Cybersecurity Framework Online
    Informative References (OLIR) Submissions. (National Institute of Standards and
    Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Internal or Interagency Report (NISTIR) 8204.
    https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2019/NIST.IR.8204.pdf
                                                                                                 43


                                 NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     REFERENCES



     [10] Ross RS, Pillitteri VY, Dempsey KL, Riddle M, Guissanie G (2020) Protecting Controlled
          Unclassified Information in Nonfederal Systems and Organizations. (National Institute
          of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-
          171, Rev. 2. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-171r2
     [11] Ross RS, Dempsey KL, Pillitteri VY (2018) Assessing Security Requirements
          for Controlled Unclassified Information. (National Institute of Standards and
          Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-171A.
          https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-171A
     [12] Ross RS, Pillitteri VY, Guissanie G, Wagner R, Graubart R, Bodeau D (2019) Protecting
          Controlled Unclassified Information in Nonfederal Systems and Organizations:
          Enhanced Security Requirements for Critical Programs and High Value Assets.
          (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), Draft NIST
          Special Publication (SP) 800-171B. https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Publications/
          sp/800-171b/draft/documents/sp800-171B-draft-ipd.pdf
     [13] Dodson D, Souppaya M, Scarfone K. (2020). Mitigating the Risk of Software
          Vulnerabilities by Adopting a Secure Software Development Framework (SSDF)
          (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD),
          https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.CSWP.04232020
     [14] Paulsen C, Winkler K, Boyens J, Ng J, Gimbi J (2020). Impact Analysis Tool for
          Interdependent Cyber Supply Chain Risks (National Institute of Standards and
          Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), Draft NIST Internal or Interagency Report (NISTIR)
          8272. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8272-draft
     [15] Boyens J, Paulsen C, Bartol N, Winkler K, Gimbi J (2020). Key Practices in Cyber
          Supply Chain Risk Management: Observations from Industry. (National Institute of
          Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), Draft NIST Internal or Interagency
          Report (NISTIR) 8276. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8276-draft
     [16] Alagic G, Alperin-Sheriff J, Apon D, Cooper DA, Dang QH, Miller CA, Moody D, Peralta
          R, Perlner RA, Robinson A, Smith-Tone D, Liu Y-K (2019) Status Report on the First
          Round of the NIST Post-Quantum Cryptography Standardization Process. (National
          Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Interagency or Internal
          Report (IR) 8240. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8240
     [17] Turan MS, McKay KA, Çalık Ç, Chang D, Bassham L. Status Report on the First Round of
          the NIST Lightweight Cryptography Standardization Process (2019). (National Institute
          of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Interagency or Internal Report
          (IR) 8268. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8268
     [18] Marron JA, Gopstein AM, Bartol N, Feldman V (2019) Cybersecurity Framework Smart
          Grid Profile. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST
          Technical Note (TN) 2051. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.TN.2051
44


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
                                                                                  REFERENCES



[19] Yaga DJ, Mell PM, Roby N, Scarfone KA (2018) Blockchain Technology Overview.
     (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Interagency
     or Internal Report (IR) 8202. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8202
[20] Newhouse WD, Scribner B, Keith S. Witte GA (2017) National Initiative for
     Cybersecurity Education (NICE) Cybersecurity Workforce Framework. (National
     Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication
     (SP) 800-181. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-181
[21] Executive Order 13870 (2019) America’s Cybersecurity Workforce. (The White House,
     Washington, DC), Federal Register Volume 84, Issue 90 (May 9, 2019).
     https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/FR-2019-05-09/2019-09750
[22] Grassi PA, Garcia ME, Fenton JL (2017) Digital Identity Guidelines. (National Institute of
     Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) 800-63-3,
     Includes updates as of March 02, 2020. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-63-3
[23] Office of Management and Budget (2019) M-19-17, Enabling Mission Delivery
     through Improved Identity, Credential, and Access Management. (The White House,
     Washington, DC), OMB Memorandum M-19-17, May 21, 2019. Available at
     https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/M-19-17.pdf
[24] Franklin JM, Howell G, Boeckl K, Lefkovitz N, Nadeau E, Shariati D, … Peck M (2019).
     Mobile Device Security Corporate-Owned Personally-Enabled (COPE). (National
     Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication
     (SP) 1800-21. https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/sites/default/files/library/sp1800/mdse-nist-
     sp1800-21-draft.pdf
[25] Franklin J, Howell G, Ledgerwood S, Griffith J. (2018). Security Analysis of First
     Responder Mobile and Wearable Devices. (National Institute of Standards and
     Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), Draft NIST Internal or Interagency Report (NISTIR)
     8196. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8196-draft
[26] Fisher W, Grassi P, Dog S, Jha S, Kim W, McCorkill T, ... Barker W. (2019). Mobile
     Application Single Sign-On: Improving Authentication for Public Safety First
     Responders. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD),
     Second Draft NIST Special Publication (SP) 1800-13.
     https://www.nccoe.nist.gov/projects/use-cases/mobile-sso
[27] Rose S, Borchert O, Mitchell S, Connelly S. (2019). Zero Trust Architecture. (National
     Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), Second Draft NIST Special
     Publication (SP) 800-207. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-207-draft2
[28] Haag WA, Jr, Montgomery DC, Barker WC, Tan A (2019) Protecting the Integrity of
     Internet Routing: Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) Route Origin Validation. (National
     Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication
     (SP) 1800-14. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.1800-14
                                                                                                  45


                                NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     REFERENCES



     [29] Fagan M, Megas K, Scarfone K, Smith M. (2019). Core Cybersecurity Feature Baseline
          For Securable Iot Devices: A Starting Point For Iot Device Manufacturers. (National
          Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), Second Draft NIST Internal
          or Interagency Report (NISTIR) 8259. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8259-draft2
     [30] Fagan M, Yang M, Tan A, Randolph L, Scarfone K. (2019). Security Review of Consumer
          Home Internet of Things (IoT) Products. (National Institute of Standards and
          Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), Draft NIST Internal or Interagency Report (NISTIR)
          8267. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8267-draft
     [31] Executive Order 13859 (2019) Maintaining American Leadership in Artificial
          Intelligence. (The White House, Washington, DC), DCPD- 201900073, February 11, 2019.
          https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/DCPD-201900073
     [32] Tabassi, E., Burns, K. J., Hadjimichael, M., Molina-Markham, A. D., & Sexton, J. T. (2019).
          A Taxonomy and Terminology of Adversarial Machine Learning. (National Institute
          of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), Draft NIST Interagency or Internal
          Report (IR) 8269. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8269-draft




46


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
ACRONYMS
ACD      ITL Applied Cybersecurity        DODCAR DoD Cybersecurity Analysis
         Division                                and Review
AI       Artificial Intelligence          EAC    Election Assistance
AML      Adversarial Machine Learning            Commission
ANTD     ITL Advanced Network             EL     Engineering Laboratory
         Technologies Division            EMM    Enterprise Mobility
ANSI     American National Standards             Management
         Institute                        EO     Executive Order
BGP      Border Gateway Protocol          FCSM   Federal Computer Security
CAE      Centers of Academic                     Program Managers
         Excellence                       FIDO   Fast IDentity Online
CFReDS   Computer Forensic Reference      FIPS   Federal Information Processing
         Data Sets                               Standard
CFTT     Computer Forensic Tool Testing   FISMA  Federal Information Security
CIDAR    Cyber Incident Data and                 Modernization Act
         Analysis Repository              FOIA   Freedom of Information Act
CMVP     Cryptographic Module             GFCE   Global Forum for Cyber
         Validation Program                      Expertise
CNA      CVE Naming Authorities           GSA    General Services Administration
COPE     Corporate-owned Personally-      HAVA   Help America Vote Act
         Enabled                          HVA    High Value Asset
CPE      Common Platform                  IAM    Identity and Access
         Enumerations                            Management
CPS      Cyber-Physical Systems           ICAM   Identity, Credentials, and
CSD      ITL Computer Security Division          Access Management
CSRC     Computer Security Resource       IAD    ITL Information Access Division
         Center                           IAPP   International Association of
CUI      Controlled, Unclassified                Privacy Professionals
         information                      ICS    Industrial Control Systems
CVE      Common Vulnerabilities and       IEC    International Electrotechnical
         Exposures                               Commission
DER      Distributed Energy Resources     IETF   Internet Engineering Task Force
DES      Data Encryption Standard         IoT    Internet of Things
DFARS    Defense Federal Acquisition      IT     Information Technology
         Regulations Supplement           ITL    Information Technology
DHS      Department of Homeland                  Laboratory
         Security                         ITC    Institute for Testing and
DoD      Department of Defense                   Certification
                                          IWG    Interagency Working Group         47


                           NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     ACRONYMS



     ITU        International                     PSCR   Public Safety Communications
                Telecommunication Union                  Research
     ITU-T      ITU–Telecommunication             RDS    Reference Data Set
                Standardization Sector            RFI    Request(s) for Information
     JSON       JavaScript Object Notation        RMF    Risk Management Framework
     JTAG       Joint Test Action Group           ROV    Route Origin Validation
     LTE        Long Term Evolution               SCAP   Security Content Automation
     MTD        Mobile Threat Defense                    Protocol
     MTI        Mobile Threat Intelligence        SC     Subcommittee
     NARA       National Archives and Records     SCC    Sector Coordinating Councils
                Administration                    SCRM   Supply Chain Risk Management
     NASA       National Aeronautics and          SDLC   Software Development Life
                Space Administration                     Cycle
     NCCoE      National Cybersecurity Center     SDO    Standards Developing
                of Excellence                            Organizations
     NCP        National Checklist Program        SIDR   Secure Inter-Domain Routing
     NGAC       Next-Generation Access            SIM    Subscriber Identity Module
                Control                           SMB    Small and Medium-Sized
     NICE       National Initiative for                  Businesses
                Cybersecurity Education           SSCA   Software and Supply Chain
     NISTIR     NIST Interagency Report                  Assurance
     NITRD      Networking and Information        SSD    ITL Software and Systems
                Technology Research and                  Division
                Development                       SSDF   Secure Software Development
     NPSBN      National Public Safety                   Framework
                Broadband Network                 SSE    Systems Security Engineering
     NSRL       National Software Reference       SURF   Summer Undergraduate
                Library                                  Research Fellowship
     NVD        National Vulnerability Database   TGDC   Technical Guidelines
     OIF        Open Identity Federation                 Development Committee
     OLIR       Online Informative Reference      TLS    Transport Layer Security
     OMB        Office of Management and          VM     Virtual Machine
                Budget                            VoIP   Voice over Internet Protocol
     OSCAL      Open Security Controls            VPN    Virtual Private Network
                Assessment Language
                                                  VVSG   Voluntary Voting Systems
     PC         Project Committee                        Guidelines
     P.L.       Public Law                        XML    eXtensible Markup Language
     PDP        Policy Decision Point             YAML   YAML Ain’t Markup Language
     PEP        Policy Enforcement Point          ZTA    Zero Trust Architecture
     PIV        Personal Identity Verification
48
     PQC        Post Quantum Cryptography

     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
OPPORTUNITIES    TO ISENGAGE
           THIS PAGE             WITH
                       INTENTIONALLY LEFT THE
                                          BLANK

NIST CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM DURING FY 2020
NIST provides many opportunities to collaborate and conduct research, including:
  •   Guest Research Internships opportunities at ITL for 6- to 24-month terms.
      Qualified individuals should contact ITL (itl_inquiries@nist.gov) to provide
      qualifications and indicate the area of work that is of interest.
  •   The NIST Pathways Program offers paths to federal internships for students from
      high school through post-graduate school as well as careers for recent graduates.
      It provides training and career development opportunities for individuals who
      are at the beginning of their federal service. For further details on Pathways and
      other student programs at NIST, please see https://www.nist.gov/ohrm/staffing/
      students.cfm.
  •   The ITL Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship (SURF) Program is
      designed to provide hands-on research experience in applied mathematics,
      statistics, computer security, information access, software testing, and networking
      technologies. See https://www.nist.gov/itl/how-work-us/itl-surf-program.
  •   Opportunities for a temporary assignment of government or military personnel for
      6- to 24-month details in ITL. Qualified individuals should contact itl_inquiries@
      nist.gov to provide qualifications and indicate the area of work that is of interest.

                                                                                              49


                              NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
     OPPORTUNITIES TO ENGAGE WITH THE NIST CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM DURING FY 2020



       •   Security Research – NIST occasionally undertakes security work funded by other
           agencies. Such sponsored work is accepted by NIST when it can cost-effectively
           further the goals of both NIST and the sponsoring institution.
       •   More detailed information about ITL’s divisions and their research topics are
           available at https://www.nist.gov/itl/how-work-us/itl-opportunities.


     Federal Computer Security Managers’ (FCSM) Forum
     The FCSM Forum is covered in detail in Focus Area 5 of this report. Membership is free and
     open to federal employees. For further information, please visit the FCSM Forum website at
     https://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SMA/forum/membership.html.

     Funding Opportunities at NIST
     NIST funds industrial and academic research in several ways. The Small Business Innovation
     Research Program funds R&D proposals from small businesses; see https://www.nist.
     gov/sbir. NIST offers grants to encourage work in the fields of precision measurement,
     fire research, and materials science. Grants and awards supporting research by industry,
     academia, and other institutions are available on a competitive basis through various
     Institute offices.
     For general information on the NIST grants programs, please contact Mr. Christopher
     Hunton at (301) 975-5718 or by email at grants@nist.gov. Funding opportunity
     information is available at https://www.nist.gov/about-nist/funding-opportunities.




50


     NIST/ITL CYBERSECURITY PROGRAM ANNUAL REPORT | 2019
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
