                       Archived NIST Technical Series Publication
The attached publication has been archived (withdrawn), and is provided solely for historical purposes.
It may have been superseded by another publication (indicated below).

Archived Publication
Series/Number:             NIST Special Publication 800-23
Title:
                           Guidelines to Federal Organizations on Security Assurance and
                           Acquisition/Use of Tested/Evaluated Products
Publication Date(s):       August 2000
Withdrawal Date:           August 1, 2018
Withdrawal Note:           Pre-dates many relevant laws, regulations, and executive directives, and does not reflect NIST’s
                           current validation programs, Risk Management Framework, or the Cybersecurity Framework. For a
                           current overview, see SP 800-12 Rev. 1, An Introduction to Information Security.



Superseding Publication(s)
The attached publication has been superseded by the following publication(s):

Series/Number:
Title:


Author(s):


Publication Date(s):
URL/DOI:


Additional Information (if applicable)
Contact:                 Computer Security Division (Information Technology Laboratory)
Latest revision of the
attached publication:
Related information:     https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/risk-management/risk-management-framework-(rmf)-overview
                         https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework
                         https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/sp/800-12/rev-1/final

Withdrawal
                         https://csrc.nist.gov/news/2018/nist-to-withdraw-eleven-outdated-sp-
announcement (link):
                         800-pubs




Date updated: ƵŐƵƐƚϭ͕ϮϬϭϴ
      NAT L INST. OF STAND & TECH

                     M                      HIST
                             'I
                                    I   PUBLICATIONS



                NIST Special Publication 800-23        Guidelines to Federal Organizations on
                                                       Security Assurance and Acquisition/
                                                       Use of Tested/Evaluated Products
               Nisr                                    Recommendations of the National
                National Institute of Standards
                and Technology                         Institute of Standards and
                Technology Administration
                U.S. Department of Commerce
                                                       t  h     7
                                                       lecnnology

                                                       Edward A. Roback



                         COMPUTER                                           SECURITY




100
J57
                                                             NIST CENTENNIAL -
3.800-23
rhe           National Institute of Standards and Technology was established in 1988 by Congress to "assist industry in
          the development of technology                  .   .   .   needed to improve product quality, to modernize manufacturing processes,
to ensure product reliability           .   .   .   and to facilitate rapid commercialization ... of products based on new scientific
discoveries."
         NIST, originally founded as the National Bureau of Standards in 1901, works to strengthen U.S. industry's
competitiveness; advance science and engineering; and improve public health, safety, and the environment. One
of the agency's basic functions is to develop, maintain, and retain custody of the national standards of
measurement, and provide the means and methods for comparing standards used in science, engineering,
manufacturing, commerce, industry, and education with the standards adopted or recognized by the Federal
Government.
         As an agency of the U.S. Commerce Department's Technology Administration, NIST conducts basic and
applied research in the physical sciences and engineering, and develops measurement techniques, test
methods, standards, and related services. The Institute does generic and precompetitive work on new and
advanced technologies. NIST's research facilities are located at Gaithersburg,                                 MD 20899, and at Boulder, CO 80303.
Major technical operating units and their principal activities are listed below. For more information contact the
Publications and Program Inquiries Desk, 301-975-3058.


Office of the Director                                                                   Chemical Science and Technology
•   National Quality Program                                                             Laboratory
•   International and Academic Affairs                                                   •   Biotechnology
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                         •   Physical and Chemical Properties
Technology Services                                                                      •   Analytical Chemistry
•   Standards Services                                                                   •   Process Measurements
•   Technology Partnerships                                                              •   Surface and Microanalysis Science
•   Measurement Services
•   Information Services                                                                 Physics Laboratory
                                                                                         •   Electron and Optical Physics

Advanced Technology Program                                                              •   Atomic Physics
•   Economic Assessment                                                                  •   Optical Technology

•   Information Technology and Applications
                                                                                         •   Ionizing Radiation

•   Chemistry and Life Sciences
                                                                                         • Time and Frequency'
                                                                                         • Quantum Physics'
•   Materials and Manufacturing Technology
•   Electronics and Photonics Technology
                                                                                         Manufacturing Engineering
                                                                                         Laboratory
Manufacturing Extension Partnership                                                      •   Precision Engineering
Program                                                                                  •   Automated Production Technology
•   Regional Programs
                                                                                         •   Intelligent   Systems
•   National Programs
                                                                                         •   Fabrication Technology
•   Program Development
                                                                                         •   Manufacturing Systems Integration

Electronics and Electrical Engineering                                                   Building and Fire Research
Laboratory                                                                               Laboratory
•    Microelectronics                                                                    •   Applied Economics
•    Law Enforcement Standards                                                           •   Structures
•    Electricity                                                                         •   Building Materials
•    Semiconductor Electronics                                                           •   Building Environment
                                        1
•    Radio-Frequency Technology                                                          •   Fire Safety Engineering
                                    1

•    Electromagnetic Technology                                                          •   Fire Science
                       1

•    Optoelectronics
                                                                                         Information Technology Laboratory
                                                                                                                                       2
Materials Science and Engineering                                                        •   Mathematical and Computational Sciences
Laboratory                                                                               •   Advanced Network Technologies
•    Intelligent Processing of Materials                                                 •   Computer Security
•    Ceramics                                                                            •   Information Access and User Interfaces
                             1
•    Materials Reliability                                                               •   High Performance Systems and Services
•    Polymers                                                                            •   Distributed Computing and Information Services
•    Metallurgy                                                                          •   Software Diagnostics and Conformance Testing
•    NIST Center for Neutron Research                                                    •   Statistical   Engineering


'At Boulder, CO 80303.
2
    Some elements at Boulder, CO.
NIST Special Publication 800-23   Guidelines to Federal Organizations on
                                  Security Assurance and Acquisition/
                                  Use of Tested/Evaluated Products
                                  Recommendations of the National
                                  Institute of Standards and
                                  Technology

                                  Edward A. Roback




        COMPUTER                                           SECURITY
                                  Computer Security Division
                                  Information Technology Laboratory
                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                  Gaithersburg,       MD
                                                      20899-8930




                                  August 2000




                                                  *
                                         res o*




                                  U.S. Department of Commerce
                                  Norman Y. Mineta, Secretary
                                  Technology Administration
                                  Dr. Cheryl L. Shavers, Under Secretary of Commerce for Technology

                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                  Raymond G. Kammer, Director
                                 Reports on Computer Systems Technology

       The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical leadership for the Nation's measurement and
standards infrastructure for information technology. ITL develops tests, test methods, reference data, proof of concept
implementations and technical analyses to advance the development and productive use of information technology.
ITL's responsibilities include the development of technical, physical, administrative, and management standards and
guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive unclassified information in federal computer systems.
This Special Publication 800 series reports on ITL's research, guidance, and outreach efforts in computer security, and
its   collaborative activities with industry, government, and academic organizations.




             National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-23
                Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 800-23, 17 pages (Aug. 2000)
                                                 CODEN: NSPUE2




                                 U.S.   GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                               WASHINGTON: 2000

      For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402-9325
      Guidelines to Federal Organizations on Security Assurance and
                    Acquisition/Use of Tested/Evaluated Products


                               Recommendations of the
                    National Institute of Standards and Technology

Purpose

This document provides guidelines for Federal organizations' acquisition and use of
security-related Information Technology (IT) products.              NIST's advice is provided in the
context of larger recommendations regarding security assurance.


Authority

This document has been developed by NIST in furtherance of its statutory responsibilities
(under the Computer Security Act of 1987 and the Information Technology Management
Reform Act of 1996, specifically 15 U.S.C. 278 g-3(a)(5) ). This is not a guideline within
the meaning of (15 U.S.C. 278 g-3 (a)(3)).


These guidelines are for use by Federal organizations which process sensitive
                   They are consistent with the requirements of OMB Circular A- 130,
               1

information.
Appendix HI.

The guidelines herein are not mandatory and binding standards. This document may be
used by non-governmental organizations on a voluntary basis. It is not subject to
copyright.


Nothing in this document should be taken to contradict standards and guidelines made
mandatory and binding upon Federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under his
statutory authority. Nor should these guidelines be interpreted as altering or superseding
the existing authorities of the Secretary of Commerce, the Director of the Office of
Management and Budget, or any other Federal official.

Background

These guidelines provide advice to agencies for sensitive (i.e., non-national security)
unclassified systems. This advice regarding sensitive unclassified systems complements



1

 Many people think that sensitive information only requires protection from unauthorized disclosure.
However, the Computer Security Act provides a much broader definition of the term
"sensitive information:" any information, the loss, misuse, or unauthorized access to or modification of
which could adversely affect the national interest or the conduct offederal programs, or the privacy to
which individuals are entitled under section 552a of title 5, United States Code (the Privacy Act), but which
has not been specifically authorized under criteria established by an Executive Order or an Act of
Congress to be kept secret in the interest of national defense or foreign policy.



                                                      1
the guidance recently issued for the national security community for the use and
acquisition of "information assurance" products.


In January 2000, the National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems
Security Committee (NSTISSC) issued National Security Telecommunications and
Information Systems Security Policy (NSTISSP) Number 1 1, "National Policy
Governing the Acquisition of Information Assurance (IA) and IA-Enabled Information
Technology Products." NSTISSP Number 11 applies to national security systems as
defined in National Security Directive 42.          A summary of NSTISSP Number 1 1 appears
in Appendix I for reference purposes.           The complete document is available to
Government organizations through the NSTSSC Secretariat (142), National Security
Agency, 9800 Savage Road, Ft. Meade, MD, 20755-6716.

Guidelines


1.    Federal departments and agencies should understand the concept of computer
      security assurance.


Broadly speaking, computer security assurance provides a basis for one to have
confidence that security measures, both technical and operational, work as intended.
                                     2
Varying degrees of assurance are supported through methods such as conformance
testing, security evaluation, and trusted development methodologies.  Assurance is not,
however, a guarantee that the measures work as intended; it is closely related to areas of
                             3
reliability and quality.



2.     Federal departments and agencies should be aware of how assurance in the
       acquired products supports security.

In general, the higher the assurance, the greater the confidence a manager has that the IT
products, systems, networks being used work as intended and are being sufficiently
              4
protected.        Assurance in individual product components contributes to overall system
security assurance - but it neither provides a guarantee of system assurance nor, in and of
itself, secures a system.        Use of products with an appropriate degree of assurance
contributes to security and assurance of the system as a whole and thus should be an
important factor in IT procurement decisions. For a security product, system or software
a combination of measures for such areas as security functionality, sound development
and operational practices, and periodic inspection and review, needs to be addressed as
well. In other words, complementary and interdependent controls are needed, such as
sound operating procedures, adequate training, comprehensive policies, sound security
architectures, and a comprehensive risk management program.


2
    The term "assurance" is used throughout as shorthand for "security assurance."
3
 Details regarding the definition of assurance and examples of how it can be obtained can be found in
NIST Special Publication 800-12, "An Introduction to Computer Security: The NIST Handbook" available
at http://csrc.nist.gov/nistpubs/.
4
    Sufficient protection refers to the level of security deemed so by the management official who authorizes
a system to process information, (some agencies refer to this authorization as accreditation). See Appendix
III to   OMB Circular A- 130.

                                                        2
3.   Federal departments and agencies should be knowledgeable of the many
     approaches to obtaining security assurance in the products they procure.

There are a number of ways that security assurance in products and systems is
achieved/determined, such as:


NIST, NSA or other Conformance Testing and Validation Suites
Testing and Certification
Evaluation and Validation
Advanced or Trusted Development Techniques
Performance Track Record/Users' Experiences
Warranties, Integrity Statements, and Liabilities
Secure Distribution


Note that the reliability of these methods can vary considerably. See Chapter 9 entitled
"Assurance" in An Introduction to Computer Security: The NIST Handbook NIST
Computer Security Handbook and the Common Criteria general information web page at
http://csrc. nist. gov/nistpubs/ and http://niap.nist.gov/cc-scheme for a more in-depth
discussion.


4.   Federal agencies should specifically be aware of the benefits that can be obtained
     through testing of commercial products against customer, government, or
     vendor-developed specifications.

Two Government programs are of particular interest here - the National Information
Assurance Partnership (NIAP)'s Common Criteria Evaluation and Validation Program
and NIST's Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP). The NIAP program
focuses on evaluations of products (e.g., a firewall or operating system) against a set of
security specifications.   The CMVP program focuses on security conformance testing of
a cryptographic module against Federal Information Processing Standard 140-1, Security
Requirements for Cryptographic Modules and related Federal cryptographic algorithm
standards.


The NIST / NSA - sponsored NIAP is a U.S. Government initiative designed to meet
the security evaluation needs of both IT producers and consumers. The NIAP program is
intended to foster the availability of objective methods for evaluating the security of IT
products. In addition, NIAP is designed to foster the development of commercial testing
laboratories that can provide the types of testing and evaluation services which will meet
the demands of both producers and consumers.      The NIAP focuses on evaluations
conducted in accordance with the "Common Criteria" (ISO/EEC 15408) evaluation
approach. In addition to containing a taxonomy of security functional requirements, the
"Common Criteria" specifies seven predefined assurance packages, known as Evaluation
Assurance Levels (EALs). While these may be more generally well-known, the Common
Criteria provides the flexibility to allow producers and consumers to define their unique
assurance requirements (i.e., use of one of the predefined EALs is not mandatory.)




                                              3
Agencies may use the laboratories accredited by the National Voluntary Laboratory
Accreditation Program (NVLAP) to perform evaluations of products against security
requirements expressed using the "Common Criteria." As the NIAP progresses, such
security requirements, known as "protection profiles" will be developed by industry and
government consumers. For those security requirements which may be appropriate to a
broad segment of its Federal community, NIST intends to generally promulgate
protection profiles as technical guidelines to the Federal community following an
informal agency review and comment process. Testing can also be accomplished against
vendor-developed security requirements associated with a vendor's specific product or
system, known as a "security target."This testing can support vendor security claims.
The evaluation conducted by accredited private sector laboratories under the auspices of
NIAP provides for varying levels of assurance, to meet customer requirements. (See
http://niap.nist.gov.)


The Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP), which is jointly run with
the Government of Canada's Communications Security Establishment, provides
customers with assurance, through functional testing, that:


        1)   a cryptographic module meets one of the four security specification levels of
             Federal Information Processing Standard 140-1, Security Requirements for
             Cryptographic Modules (a mandatory Federal Information Processing
             Standard for sensitive (unclassified) applications and


        2)   that the FlPS-approved algorithms (e.g., Triple DES) are correctly
             implemented.


Assurance of the proper functioning of cryptographic modules and algorithms is
considered critical because encryption techniques are used to protect sensitive data that is
transmitted over untrusted paths (e.g., over the Internet). Additionally, the knowledge of
and consequences resulting from unauthorized disclosure of information may not be
apparent for some time (as compared, say, to the immediate awareness that a homepage
has been defaced). The specifications for FIPS 140-1 and a current list of validated
modules can be found at http://csrc.nist.gov/cryptval/

CMVP tested modules are often integrated into commercial products with additional (i.e.,
non-cryptographic) functionality. The assurance provided by CMVP concerning
cryptographic modules does not imply assurance with regard to other aspects of the
product into which the module is incorporated. The CC-NIAP evaluation approach
described can be used to complement the     CMVP (i.e., to evaluate other security
requirements of the product), thereby addressing assurance of the overall product.


5.   Federal departments and agencies should acquire and use products appropriate
     to their risk environment and the cost-effective selection of security measures.
     Agencies should develop policies for the procurement and use of evaluated
     products as appropriate. When selecting products, agencies need to consider the




                                              4
      threat/risk environment, cost-effectiveness, assurance level, and security
      functional specifications, as appropriate.


A listing of products which have been validated under the NIAP's Common Criteria
Evaluation and Validation Program can be found via http://niap.nist.gov. At the time of
this writing, no     Common Criteria protection profiles have been designated as mandatory
and binding by the Secretary of Commerce.             It is   NIST's intent to issue protection
profiles (when appropriate) as technical security guidelines to the Federal community.


With specific regard to cryptographic modules and FlPS-approved cryptographic
algorithms, agencies are reminded that the use of modules tested as conformant to
Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules (Federal Information Processing
Standard 140-1) has been made mandatory and binding by the Secretary of Commerce.
NIST maintains a publicly available list of modules, which have been so validated, at
http://csrc.nist.gov/cryptval/


6.    Federal Agencies should give substantial consideration in IT procurement and
      deployment for IT products that have been evaluated and tested by independent
      accredited laboratories against appropriate security specifications and
      requirements. Examples of these specifications will include NIST recommended
      protection profiles based on ISO/IEC 15408, the Common Criteria.


The ultimate goal in purchasing a system is to obtain the necessary functionality and
performance within cost and time constraints. Moreover, performance includes
dependability and reliability and hence is directly impacted by security considerations. In
general, third party testing and evaluation provides a significantly greater basis for
customer confidence than many other assurance techniques. Yet, it is important to note
that purchasing an evaluated product simply because it is evaluated and without due
consideration of applicable functional and assurance requirements, may be neither useful
nor cost effective.      IT users need to consider their overall requirements and select the
best products accordingly.


7.    Federal departments and agencies need to address how products (with
      appropriate assurance) are configured and integrated properly, securely and
                                                             5
      subject to the managerial operational approval process so as to help ensure
      security is appropriately addressed on a system-wide basis.


The overall assurance level of a system as a whole may be different (usually lower) than
the assurance level of individual components.            While product assurance is a crucial and
necessary input into the system security process, all the usual policies, controls, and risk
management processes must also be in place for a system to operate in a reasonably
secure mode. There are typically specific configuration settings that must be employed
for the product to operate in the secure manner desired. In addition, much attention must
be paid to combining such products in order to provide an appropriate security solution

5
    This refers to the approval process discussed in Office of Management and Budget Circular A-130,
Appendix III.
for a given risk and threat environment. Thus, in addition to employing products with
appropriate security capabilities and assurance, review of the security of a system from a
system-wide perspective supports the managerial operational approval process.


Agencies should also be aware of the interconnectivity and associated interdependence of
organizations and that a risk accepted by one organization may inadvertently expose
other organizations to the same risk.


Supplemental Information

Appendix I: Fact Sheet — National Security Telecommunications and Information
Systems Security (NSTISSP) Number 11, National Information Assurance Acquisition
Policy. (NSTISSP Number 1 1 itself is "For Official Use Only" and therefore not
included in this document.)


Appendix II: National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security
Committee Advisory Memorandum for the Strategy for Using the National Information
Assurance Partnership (NIAP)for the Evaluation of Commercial OJf-the-Shelf (COTS)
Security Enabled Information Technology Products. (NSTISSAM INFOSEC/2-00)




                                             6
                                                                                              APBENDIX   I




                                         FACT SHEET

                                      NSTISSPNo. 11
           National Information Assurance Acquisition Policy



                                                                                      January 2000
Background

(1)  National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security
Policy (NSTISSP) No. 11, Subject:  National Policy Governing the Acquisition of
Information Assurance (IA) and IA- Enabled Information Technology (IT) Prod-
ucts is issued by the National Security Telecommunications and Information
Systems Security Committee (NSTISSC).

(2)  The NSTISSC was established by National Security Directive (NSD) No. 42.
dated July 1990, and is responsible for developing and promulgating national
policies applicable to the security of national security telecommunications and
information systems.

Introduction

(1) The technological advances and threats of the past decade have drastically
changed the ways we think about protecting our communications and
communications systems. Three factors are of particular significance:

      -   The need for protection encompasses more than just confidentiality:

      -   Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) security and security-enabled
          information assurance (IA) products are readily available as alternatives
          to traditional NSA-developed and produced communications security
          equipment (i.e., government-off-the shelf (GOTS) products): and

      -   An increased and continuing recognition that the need for IA transcends
          more than just the traditional national security applications of the past.



NSTISSC Secretariat (142) • National Security Agency • 9800 Savage Road STE 6716 • Ft Meade MD 20755-6716
                     (410) 854-6805   OR Toll Free   1   -888-NSTISSC- UFAX: (410) 854-6814
                                           nstissc@radium.ncsc.mil                                           I-
(2)  In the context of the second of the above factors, it is important that COTS
products acquired by U.S. Government Departments and Agencies be subject to
a standardized evaluation process which will provide some assurances that
these products perform as advertised. Accordingly, the attached policy has
been developed as a means of addressing this problem for those products
acquired for national security applications. The policy also rightfully points out
that protection of systems encompasses more than just acquiring the right
product. Once acquired, these products must be integrated properly and
subject to an accreditation process which will ensure total integrity of the
information and systems to be protected.

Policy

(1)  Information Assurance (LA) shall be considered as a requirement for all
systems used to enter, process, store, display, or transmit national security
information. IA shall be achieved through the acquisition and appropriate
implementation of evaluated or validated Government Off-the-Shelf (GOTS) or
Commercial Off-the-Shelf (COTS) IA and IA-enabled Information Technology (IT)
products- These products should provide for the availability of the systems;
ensure the integrity and confidentiality of information, and the authentication
and non-repudiation of parties in electronic transactions.

(2)   Effective   1   January 2001, preference shall be given to the acquisition of
COTS IA and IA-enabled IT products (to be used on systems entering,
processing, storing, displaying, or transmitting national security information)
which have been evaluated and validated, as appropriate, in accordance with:

      -     The International Common Criteria for Information Security Technology
            Evaluation Mutual Recognition Arrangement:

      -     The National Security Agency (NSA)/ National Institute of Standards and
            Technology (NIST) National Information Assurance Partnership (NIAP)
            Evaluation and Validation Program: or

      -     The NIST Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) validation
            program.

(3) The evaluation /validation of COTS IA and IA-enabled IT products will be
conducted by accredited commercial laboratories, or the NIST.

(4)   By 1 July 2002, the acquisition of all COTS IA and IA-enabled IT products
to be used on the systems specified in paragraph (2). above, shall be limited
only to those which have been evaluated and validated in accordance with the
criteria,   schemes, or programs specified in the three sub-bullets.

                                            1-2
(5)   The acquisition of all GOTS IA and IA-enabled products to be used on
systems entering, processing, storing, displaying, or transmitting national
security information shall be limited to products which have been evaluated by
the NSA, or in accordance with NSA- approved processes.

(6)   Normally, a complementary combination of IA/IA-enabled products is
needed to provide a complete security solution to a given environment. Thus, in
addition to employing evaluated and validated IA/IA-enabled products, a
solution security analysis should be conducted as part of the certification and
accreditation process. In support of this, NSA shall provide guidance regarding
the appropriate combinations and implementation of GOTS and COTS IA and
IA-enabled products.
(7)   Subject to policy and guidance for non-national security systems,
departments and agencies may wish to consider the acquisition and appropriate
implementation of evaluated and validated COTS IA and IA-enabled IT products.
The use of these products may be appropriate for systems which process, store,
display, or transmit information that, although not classified, may be critical or
essential to the conduct of organizational missions, or for information or
systems which may be associated with the operation and/or maintenance of
critical infrastructures as defined in Presidential Decision Directive No. 63
(PDD-63). Critical Infrastructure Protection.

Responsibilities

(8) Heads of U.S. Departments and Agencies are responsible for ensuring
compliance with the requirements of this policy.

Exemptions and Waivers

(9)   COTS or GOTS IA and IA-enabled IT products acquired prior to the effective
dates prescribed herein shall be exempt from the requirements of this policy.
Information systems in which those products are integrated should be operated
with care and discretion and evaluated /validated IA products and solutions
considered as replacement upgrades at the earliest opportunity.

(10) Waivers to this policymay be granted by the NSTISSC on a case-by-case
basis.  Requests for waivers, including a justification and explanatory details,
shall be forwarded through the Director, National Security Agency (DIRNSA),
ATTN: VI, who shall provide appropriate recommendations for NSTISSC
consideration. Where time and circumstances may not allow for the full review
and approval of the NSTISSC membership, the Chairman of the NSTISSC is
authorized to approve waivers to this policy which may be necessary to support
U.S. Government operations which are time -sensitive, or where U.S. lives may
be at risk.

                                       1-3
                                                              1




                                    APPENDIX   II




         UNCLASSIFIED
                                NSTISSAM INFOSEC/2-00




             ADVISORY MEMORANDUM
                    FOR THE
  STRATEGY FOR USING THE NATIONAL INFORMATION
ASSURANCE PARTNERSHIP (NIAP) FOR THE EVALUATION
  OF COMMERCIAL OFF-THE-SHELF (COTS) SECURITY
   ENABLED INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PRODUCTS




     THIS DOCUMENT PROVIDES MINIMUM STANDARDS. FURTHER
IMPLEMENTATION MAY BE REQUHIED BY YOUR DEPARTMENT OR AGENCY.




                                                        II-


         T IN(TT   A SSITFTFD
                                                   UNCLASSIFIED

                          National Security Telecommunications and Information Systems Security Committee




                                         NATIONAL MANAGER



                                                   FOREWORD




            1.This Advisory Memorandum provides guidance to U.S. Government
      departments and agencies regarding the strategy behind the National
      Information Assurance Partnership (NIAP) for the evaluation of commercial off-
      the-shelf (COTS) security enabled information technology products and, from a
      practical standpoint, details its implementation. It also serves to document the
      respective roles of the National Security Agency (NSA), the National Institute of
      Standards and Technology (NIST) and the accredited laboratories in the overall
      COTS evaluation and validation process.

            2.Issuance of the document represents another step in a continuing effort
      to keep departments and agencies apprised of significant information systems
      security or information assurance developments which may impact on the
      operations and activities of their respective organizations. This advisory
      supplements information previously published on the evaluation of COTS
      products which was published in NSTISSAM COMPUSEC/1-99, Subject:
      Advisory Memorandum on the Transition From the Trusted Computer System
      Evaluation Criteria to the International Common Criteria for Information
      Technology Security Evaluation, dated 1 1 March 1999.




                                           MICHAEL V. HAYDEN
                                         Lieutenant General, USAF




      NSTISSC Secretariat (142) • National Security Agency • 9800 Savage Road STE 6716 • Ft Meade MD 20755-6716
                                            (410) 854-6805 • UFAX: (410) 854-6814

H-2                                            nstissc@radium.ncsc.mil


                                                 UNCLASSIFIED
                                       UNCLASSIFIED
                                                                NSTISSAM INFOSEC/2-00



                                   ADVISORY MEMORANDUM
                                             ON THE
                               STRATEGY FOR USING
              THE NATIONAL INFORMATION ASSURANCE PARTNERSHIP (NIAP)
              FOR THE EVALUATION OF COMMERCIAL OFF-THE-SHELF (COTS)
               SECURITY ENABLED INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY PRODUCTS


                                    SECTION I - REFERENCES

        a.   NSTISSAM COMPUSEC/ 1 -99. Advisory Memorandum on the Transition from the
Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC) to the International Common Criteria
for Information Technology Security Evaluation, dated 1 1 March 1999


      b.   NSTISSAM COMPUSEC/ 1 -98. The Role of Firewalls and Guards in Enclave
Boundary Protection, dated December 1998


                              SECTION II - GENERAL BACKGROUND

        1
        .    Reference a. provided guidance to U.S. Government departments and agencies on
the transition from the Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (better known as the
Orange Book) to the International Common Criteria as the basis for evaluation of commercial
off-the-shelf (COTS) security and security-enabled information technology (IT) products.   It

further advised that the National Security Agency (NSA) and the National Institute of Standards
and Technology (NIST) had established the National Information Assurance Partnership (NIAP)
to accredit private sector laboratories to evaluate products and systems in accordance with the
Common Criteria.

       2.      This advisory provides additional information on the NIAP process for evaluating
COTS security and security-enabled IT products, the NIAP product certificate, and the NIAP
Validated Products List (VPL). Additionally, this advisory provides guidance on the NSA strategy
to use the   Common Criteria and the NIAP to certify security and security-enabled IT products
for the national security community.




             SECTION ITI - THE NATIONAL INFORMATION ASSURANCE PARTNERSHIP

       3.    The NIAP is a collaboradve effort between NIST and NSA designed to meet the
security evaluation needs of both IT producers and users. The program fosters the availability
of standardized specifications and test methods for evaluating the security robustness of COTS
security and security-enabled IT products. In addition, it is designed to foster the development
of commercial testing laboratories to provide security evaluation services which will meet the
demands of both producers and users. NIAP testing will replace the COTS IT product
evaluations previously performed by NSA under the Trusted Product Evaluation Program (TPEP)
and other programs.

       4.      The NIAP program requires an extensive accreditation process for all commercial
laboratories. This process, performed by the National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation
Program (NVLAP). an internationally recognized accreditation body, analyzes the laboratory
quality processes against the International Standards Organization (ISO) Guide 25 and ISO


                                                                                                II-3

                                       UNCLASSIFIED
                                       UNCLASSIFIED
                                                                  NSTISSAM INFOSEC/2-00

9000 quality principles. Additionally, the laboratories are analyzed and tested on their ability to
interpret and apply the Common Criteria (CC) and its associated Common Evaluation
Methodology. Once accredited by NVLAP and accepted by NIAP into the program, a laboratory
will contract directly with a sponsor (usually a product manufacturer) to have a security or
security-enabled IT product evaluated. NIAP assigns a government validator to each product
evaluation to monitor the laboratory compliance with the CC as well as the quality and
consistency of work being performed.

        5.    The laboratory will evaluate the product against a Security Target (ST) provided by
the vendor. The ST is a CC-based document which describes the product's security
functionality claims, as well as the desired level of evaluation (specified as an Evaluated
Assurance Level (EAL)) that the laboratory performs to verify whether the product meets its
security claims. If the product meets the ST criteria, the laboratory issues a report to NIAP
documenting the results of the analysis performed by the laboratory. NIAP reviews the
laboratory report to determine if the analysis was consistent with CC requirements. If
consistent. NIAP will issue a certificate to the sponsor of the evaluation validating that the
product is consistent with the claims in the ST. This certificate is signed by the NIST and NSA
senior level executives responsible for the NIAP program and the product is listed on the NIAP
VPL which can be found at:

             http:// niap. nistgov/cc-scheme/ ValidatedProducts. html


       6.    Important: Products listed on the NIAP VPL should not be interpreted as an NSA
or a NIST endorsement or certification of the product for government use.    It is only a validation

that the product met its security claims consistent with the level of analysis performed by the
laboratory and that the laboratory analysis performed was consistent with CC and Common
Evaluation Methodology requirements. For example, a product may claim that it performs
access control using a password entry system with a two character password. If the laboratory
finds that indeed the product provides access control using a two character password, the
product has successfully met its claim and would be awarded a certificate signed by NIST and
NSA However, this does not mean that either NIST or NSA endorse a product employing a two
character password as appropriate for government access control requirements.

       7.    Important: Security vulnerabilities may exist in a product for which a validation
certificate was issued by NIAP if such vulnerabilities would have been only discovered as a
result of a level of evaluauon (i.e.. EAL) higher than that specified in the security target.
Government integrators are advised to carefully read the ST and NIAP validation report to
determine if the product security funcUonality and evaluation level performed is appropriate for
a specific application.



                     SECTION IV - USE OF MAP FOR THE EVALUATION
                 OF COTS SECURITY AND SECURITY-ENABLED IT PRODUCTS

       8.    The migration from NSA evaluauon of COTS products to the NIAP evaluation
program is based upon several factors. Over the past decade, there has been a tremendous
growth in the availability of COTS security and security-enabled IT products, and a
corresponding increasing demand for these products to be evaluated. This increased
availability of products, coupled with rapid product updates and new releases, has led to a
dramadc increase in the Ume required to service evaluation requests. When completed, the
evaluation was often outdated as the evaluated version of the product was no longer supported
by the manufacturer. A move to commercial evaluauon facilities will allow evaluations to be



II-4

                                       UNCLASSIFIED
                                        UNCLASSIFIED
                                                                    NSTISSAM INFOSEC/2-00

performed at a faster rate than previous NSA evaluations as commercial laboratories are able to
react more quickly to market demands.


       9.    In order to achieve fairness in the market place and to avoid government
competition with the NIAP commercial laboratory evaluation program. NSA will no longer service
customer requests for the evaluation of COTS security or security-enabled IT products.
Government customers should look to the NIAP program for their security and security-enabled
COTS IT product evaluation requirements. NSA will continue to evaluate U.S. Government-
developed security products, as well as augment COTS evaluations higher than EAL4 provided
they have first undergone a preliminary NIAP evaluation.



                         SECTION V - GUIDANCE REGARDING THE USE
                    OF SECURITY AND SECURITY-ENABLED COTS IT PRODUCTS

        10.   To provide customer guidance on recommended minimum essential security
robustness requirements for security and security-enabled COTS IT products. NSA will issue a
series of technology-based Common Criteria (CC) Protection Profiles. These Protection Profiles
are being developed under the auspices of the Information Assurance Technology Framework
(IATF) in cooperation with the user community and security vendors. More detailed information
on the IATF is available at:

               http://www.iatf.net

Recommended protection profiles for firewalls were previously addressed in reference b., and
are available at:


               http://www.radium.acsc.mil/tpep/

Protection Profiles are also being developed for levels of robustness designated as:


               a.   Basic
               b.   Medium
               c.   High

       1 1 .   Protection profiles will take into account the sensitivity of the data, the level of
threat, the state of the art of COTS security products, and the cost and time for an evaluation to
be completed.

Important:    It must be emphasized that security products which meet these profiles may still

contain vulnerabilities. Nevertheless, the profiles will be the best that can be accomplished at
the present time based upon the rate of change and the maturity of COTS security product
development processes. In designing Protection Profiles for differing levels of robustness, the
threat to the information is addressed based upon the value of the information as well as the
environment in which the product will be placed. For example, the level of value of classified
information is defined to be higher than that for unclassified data. Similarly, the scope of
evaluation specified in the protection profiles is based upon the threat perceived to the data in
that environment. Additionally, the scope of evaluation must also take into account the
economic costs in performing that evaluation in terms of dollars and time and the existing state
of the art of COTS security and security enabled technology. For example, while it may be
desirable to perform a full source code analysis on all firewalls destined for an unclassified but
sensitive-mission support data environment, the economic costs of such an analysis when
weighed against the value of this information makes this approach untenable. Firewall vendors


                                                                                                      II-5
                                         UNCLASSIFIED
                                       UNCLASSIFIED
                                                                 NSTISSAM INFOSEC/2-00

are not willing to pay the attendant costs for this type of evaluation, and it is unlikely that any
such evaluation could be accomplished before a new version of the firewall would be released.


                              SECTION VI - NSA CERTIFICATIONS

        12.   NSA will certify Protection Profiles determined to be compliant with the IATF.
Protection Profiles so certified will be identified on the NSA home page at:

              http:// www. radium, ncsc mH/ tpep


Additionally, where a protection profile does not exist, government customers may request NSA
to review and certify vendor security targets (STs) to determine if the product's proposed
security functionality and level of evaluation are appropriate for the application where the
customer intends to use the product Products then evaluated and validated by NIAP approved
laboratories against NSA-certified Protection Profiles or STs will also be noted on NSA's web
page.




                                                                                               II-6




                                      UNCLASSIFIED
                                       Technical Publications

Periodical

                                                                                          —
Journal of Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Reports NIST research
and development in those disciplines of the physical and engineering sciences in which the Institute is
active. These include physics, chemistry, engineering, mathematics, and computer sciences. Papers cover a
broad range of subjects, with major emphasis on measurement methodology and the basic technology
underlying standardization. Also included from time to time are survey articles on topics closely related to
the Institute's technical and scientific programs. Issued six times a year.




Nonperiodicals

Monographs  —Major                                       on
                            contributions to the technical literature    various subjects related to the
                    and
Institute's scientific        technical activities.
Handbooks—Recommended codes of engineering and                                      codes)
                                                               industrial practice (including safety          devel-
oped  incooperation with                                            and
                               interested industries, professional organizations,        regulatory bodies.
Special Publications—Include proceedings   conferences sponsored by NIST, NIST annual
                                                      of                                     and        reports,
                                         grouping such
other special publications appropriate to this                       pocket       and
                                                                    as wall charts,           cards,    bibliographies.

National Standard Reference Data Series—Provides                  on
                                                               quantitative dataand chemical
                                                                                       the physical
properties of materials, compiled from the world's literature and critically evaluated. Developed under a
worldwide program coordinated by NIST under the authority of the National Standard Data Act (Public
Law 90-396). NOTE: The Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data (JPCRD) is published
bimonthly for NIST by the American Chemical Society (ACS) and the American Institute of Physics (AIP).
Subscriptions, reprints, and supplements are available from ACS, 1155 Sixteenth St., NW, Washington,               DC
20056.
                              —
Building Science Series Disseminates technical information developed at the Institute on building
materials, components, systems, and whole structures. The series presents research results, test methods, and
performance criteria related to the structural and environmental functions and the durability and safety
characteristics of building elements and systems.

Technical Notes   —      Studies or reports which are complete in themselves but restrictive in their treatment of
a subject. Analogous to monographs but not so comprehensive in scope or definitive in treatment of the
subject area. Often serve as a vehicle for final reports of work performed at NIST under the sponsorship of
other government agencies.
Voluntary Product Standards          —Developed under procedures published by          the Department of Commerce
in Part 10, Title 15, of the Codeof Federal Regulations. The standards establish nationally recognized
requirements for products, and provide all concerned interests with a basis for common understanding of
the characteristics of the products. NIST administers this program in support of the efforts of private-sector
standardizing organizations.

Order the following NIST publications         —FIPS and NISTIRs—from the National Technical Information
Service, Springfield, VA 22161.
                                                                                   —
Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUB) Publications in this series
collectively constitute the Federal Information Processing Standards Register. The Register serves as the
official source of information in the Federal Government regarding standards issued by NIST pursuant to
the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended, Public Law 89-306 (79 Stat.
1127), and as implemented by Executive Order 11717 (38 FR 12315, dated May 11, 1973) and Part 6 of
Title 15   CFR (Code of Federal Regulations).
                                                           —
NIST Interagency or Internal Reports (NISTIR) The series includes interim or final reports on work
performed by NIST for outside sponsors (both government and nongovernment). In general, initial
distribution is handled by the sponsor; public distribution is handled by sales through the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, VA 22161, in hard copy, electronic media, or microfiche form. NISTIR's
may also report results of NIST projects of transitory or limited interest, including those that will be
published subsequently in more comprehensive form.
w
4^
           c
           c
           o
o           I




U          o
           oc
           o
C o
E 3
     O &o
la *
Q>   — g
       Sj

a>   _          03

Q og
 .
