                       Archived NIST Technical Series Publication
The attached publication has been archived (withdrawn), and is provided solely for historical purposes.
It may have been superseded by another publication (indicated below).

Archived Publication
Series/Number:             NIST Special Publication 800-31
Title:
                           Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS)

Publication Date(s):       November 2001
Withdrawal Date:           February 2007
Withdrawal Note:
                           SP 800-31 is superseded in its entirety by the publication of
                           SP 800-94 (February 2007).


Superseding Publication(s)
The attached publication has been superseded by the following publication(s):

Series/Number:           NIST Special Publication 800-94
Title:
                         Guide to Intrusion Detection and Prevention Systems (IDPS)

Author(s):
                         Karen Scarfone, Peter Mell

Publication Date(s):     February 2007
URL/DOI:                 http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-94

Additional Information (if applicable)
Contact:                 Computer Security Division (Information Technology Lab)
Latest revision of the
                         SP 800-94 (as of June 19, 2015)
attached publication:
Related information:
                         http://csrc.nist.gov/

Withdrawal
                         N/A
announcement (link):




Date updated: June Ϯϯ, 2015
NAT'L INST. OF STAND & TECH
                                  Mist'
                                        i ill




      NIST Special Publication 800-31            Intrusion Detection Systems

                                                 Rebecca Bace and Peter Mell

      NO"
      National Institute of Standards
      and Technology
      Technology Administration
      U.S. Department of Commerce




                  COMPUTER                                         SECURITY




                                                NIST CINTINNI«ll
rhe          National Institute of Standards and Technology was established in 1988 by Congress to "assist industry in
         the development of technology         .   .   .   needed to improve product quality, to modernize manufacturing processes,
to ensure product reliability .   .   .   and to facilitate rapid commercialization ... of products based on new scientific
discoveries."
      NIST, originally founded as the National Bureau of Standards in 1901, works to strengthen U.S. industry's
competitiveness; advance science and engineering; and improve public health, safety, and the environment. One
of the agency's basic functions is to develop, maintain, and retain custody of the national standards of
measurement, and provide the means and methods for comparing standards used in science, engineering,
manufacturing, commerce, industry, and education with the standards adopted or recognized by the Federal
Government.
        As an agency of the U.S. Commerce Department's Technology Administration, NIST conducts basic and
applied research in the physical sciences and engineering, and develops measurement techniques, test
methods, standards, and related services. The Institute does generic and precompetitive work on new and
advanced technologies. NIST's research facilities are located at Gaithersburg,                      MD 20899, and at Boulder, CO 80303.
Major technical operating units and their principal activities are listed below. For more information contact the
Publications and Program Inquiries Desk, 301-975-3058.


Office of the Director                                                         Chemical Science and Technology
•   National Quality Program                                                   Laboratory
•   International and Academic Affairs                                         •   Biotechnology
                                                                               •   Physical and Chemical Properties^
Technology Services                                                            •   Analytical Chemistry
•   Standards Services                                                         •   Process Measurements
•   Technology Partnerships                                                    •   Surface and Microanalysis Science
•   Measurement Services
•   Information Services                                                       Physics Laboratory
                                                                               •   Electron and Optical Physics

Advanced Technology Program                                                    •   Atomic Physics
•   Economic Assessment                                                        •   Optical Technology

•   Information Technology and Applications
                                                                               •   Ionizing Radiation

•   Chemistry and Life Sciences
                                                                               • Time and Frequency'
                                                                               • Quantum Physics'
•   Materials and Manufacturing Technology
•   Electronics and Photonics Technology
                                                                               Manufacturing Engineering
                                                                               Laboratory
Manufacturing Extension Partnership                                            •   Precision Engineering
Program                                                                        •   Manufacturing Metrology
•   Regional Programs
                                                                               •   Intelligent Systems
•   National Programs
                                                                               •   Fabrication Technology
•   Program Development
                                                                               •   Manufacturing Systems Integration

Electronics and Electrical Engineering                                         Building and Fire Research
Laboratory                                                                     Laboratory
•   Microelectronics                                                           •   Applied Economics
•   Law Enforcement Standards                                                  •   Structures
•   Electricity                                                                •   Building Materials
•   Semiconductor Electronics                                                  •   Building Environment
•   Radio-Frequency Technology'                                                •   Fire Safety Engineering
•   Electromagnetic Technology'                                                •   Fire Science
•   Optoelectronics'
                                                                               Information Technology Laboratory
Materials Science and Engineering                                              •   Mathematical and Computational Sciences^
Laboratory                                                                     •   Advanced Network Technologies
•   Intelligent Processing of Materials                                        •   Computer Security
•   Ceramics                                                                   •   Information Access
•   Materials Reliability'                                                     •   Convergent Information Systems
•   Polymers                                                                   •   Information Services and Computing
•   Metallurgy                                                                 •   Software Diagnostics and Conformance Testing
•   NIST Center for Neutron Research                                           •   Statistical Engineering



'At Boulder,   CO 80303.
^Some elements at Boulder, CO.
NIST Special Publication 800-31   Intrusion Detection Systems


                                  Rebecca Bace^ and Peter Mell^




                                  'infidel, Inc., Scotts Valley,   CA
                                   National Institute of Standards and Technology




        COMPUTER SECURITY

                                  Computer Security Division
                                  Information Technology Laboratory
                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                  Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930




                                  November 2001




                                  U.S. Department of Commerce
                                  Donald L. Evans, Secretary


                                  Technology Administration
                                  Phillip J. Bond,   Under Secretary of Commerce for Technology


                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                  Karen H. Brown, Acting Director
                         Reports on Computer Systems Technology

The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical leadership for the Nation's measurement
and standards infrastructure. ITL develops tests, test methods, reference data, proof of concept
implementations, and technical analyses to advance the development and productive use of information
technology. ITL's responsibilities include the development of technical, physical, administrative, and
management standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive unclassified
information in Federal computer systems. This Special Publication 800-series reports on ITL's research,
guidance, and outreach efforts in computer security, and its collaborative activities with industry, govemment,
and academic organizations.




         National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-31
            Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 800-31, 48 pages (October 2001)
                                            CODEN: NSPUE2




                            U.S.   GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                         WASHINGTON: 2001


              For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Govemment Printing Office
              Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov  — Phone: (202) 512-1800     —
                                                                     Fax: (202) 512-2250
                              Mail: Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-0001
                            NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems




Intrusion Detection Systems
L      Introduction                                                                      1


2.     Overview of Intrusion Detection Systems                                           1


     2.1.   What Is Intrusion Detection?                                                 1


     2.2.   Why Should I use Intrusion Detection Systems?                                1


       2.2.1.   Preventing Problems by Increasing the Perceived Risk of Discovery and
                Punishment of Attackers                                                  2
       2.2.2.   Detecting Problems that Are Not Prevented by Other Security Measures .2
       2.2.3.   Detecting the Preambles to Attacks (Often Experienced as Network
                Probes and Other Tests for Existing Vulnerabilities)                     3

       2.2.4.   Documenting the Existing Threat                                          3

       2.2.5.   Quality Control for Security Design and Administration                   3

       2.2.6.   Providing Useful Information about Actual Intrusions                     4
     2.3.   Major Types of IDSs                                                          4
       2.3.1.   Process Model for Intrusion Detection                                    4
       2.3.2.   How Do I Distinguish Between Different Intrusion Detection
                Approaches?                                                              4
       2.3.3.   Architecture                                                             4
       2.3.4.   Goals                                                                    5

       2.3.5.   Control Strategy                                                         5

       2.3.6.   Timing                                                                   8

       2.3.7.   Information Sources                                                      9
       2.3.8.   IDS Analysis                                                            12
       2.3.9.   Response Options for IDSs                                               14

     2.4.   Tools that Complement IDSs                                                  17

       2.4.1.   Vulnerability Analysis or Assessment Systems                            17

       2.4.2.   File Integrity Checkers                                                 20
       2.4.3.   Honey Pot and Padded Cell Systems                                       21
3.     Advice on Selecting IDS Products                                                 22
     3.1.   Technical and Policy Considerations                                         22
       3.1.1.   What Is Your System Environment?                                        22
       3.1.2.   What Are Your Security Goals and Objectives?                            23
       3.1.3.   What Is Your Existing Security Policy?                                  24
     3.2.   Organizational Requirements and Constraints                                 24
       3.2.1.   What Are Requirements that are Levied from Outside the Organization? 25
       3.2.2.   What Are Your Organization's Resource Constraints?                      25



                                            iii
                                NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


     3.3.    IDS Product Features and Quality                                            26
        3.3.1.    Is the Product Sufficiently Scalable for Your Environment?             26
        3.3.2.    How Has the Product Been Tested?                                       26
        3.3.3.    What Is the User Level of Expertise Targeted by the Product?           26
        3.3.4.    Is the Product Designed to Evolve as the Organization Grows?           26
        3.3.5.    What Are the Support Provisions for the Product?                       27
4,     Deploying IDSs                                                                    28
     4.1.    Deployment Strategy for IDSs                                                28
     4.2.    Deploying Network-Based IDSs                                                29
       4.2.1.    Location: Behind Each External Firewall, in the Network   DMZ           29
       4.2.2.    Location: Outside an External Firewall                                  30
       4.2.3.    Location: On Major Network Backbones                                    30
       4.2.4.    Location:   On Critical Subnets                                         30
     4.3.    Deploying Host-Based IDSs                                                   30
     4.4.    Alarm Strategies                                                            31

5,     Strengths and Limitations of IDSs                                                 31
     5.1.    Strengths of Intrusion Detection Systems                                    31
     5.2.    Limitations of Intrusion Detection Systems                                  32
6,     Advice on Dealing with IDS Output                                                 32
     6.1.    Typical IDS Output                                                          32
     6.2.    Handling Attacks                                                            33
7,     Computer Attacks and Vulnerabilities                                              33
     7.1.    Attack Types                                                                33
     7.2.    Types of Computer Attacks Commonly Detected by IDSs                         34
       7.2.1.    Scanning Attacks                                                        34
       7.2.2.    Denial of Service Attacks                                               35
       7.2.3.    Penetration Attacks                                                     36
       7.2.4.    Remote vs. Local Attacks                                                36
       7.2.5.    Determining Attacker Location from IDS Output                           37
       7.2.6.    IDSs and Excessive Attack Reporting                                     37
     7.3.    Types of Computer Vulnerabilities                                           38
       7.3.1.    Input Validation Error:                                                 38
       7.3.2.    Access Validation Error:                                                39
       7.3.3.    Exceptional Condition Handling Error:                                   39
       7.3.4.    Environmental Error:                                                    39
       7.3.5.    Configuration Error:                                                    39
       7.3.6.    Race Condition:                                                         39
8,     The Future of IDSs                                                                40




                                               iv
                        NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


9.   Conclusion                                                                  40
Appendix A - Frequently Asked Questions about IDSs                               41
Appendix B - IDS Resources                                                       43




                                        V
                                         NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems




                      Intrusion Detection Systems
                                             Rebecca Bace\ Peter Mell''

1.       Introduction
         Intrusion detection systems (IDSs) are software or hardware systems that automate the
         process of monitoring the events occurring in a computer system or network, analyzing
         them for signs of security problems. As network attacks have increased in number and
         severity over the past few years, intrusion detection systems have become a necessary
         addition to the security infrastructure of most organizations. This guidance document is
         intended as a primer in intrusion detection, developed for those who need to understand
         what security goals intrusion detection mechanisms serve, how to select and configure
         intrusion detection systems for their specific system and network environments, how to
         manage the output of intrusion detection systems, and how to integrate intrusion detection
         functions with the rest of the organizational security infrastructure. References to other
         information sources are also provided for the reader who requires specialized or more
         detailed advice on specific intrusion detection issues.



2.       Overview of Intrusion Detection Systems
         2.1.    What Is Intrusion Detection?
                Intrusion detection is the process of monitoring the events occurring in a computer
                 system or network and analyzing them for signs of intrusions, defined as attempts to
                compromise the confidentiality, integrity, availability, or to bypass the security
                mechanisms of a computer or network. Intrusions are caused by attackers accessing
                the systems from the Internet, authorized users of the systems who attempt to gain
                additional privileges for which they are not authorized, and authorized users who
                misuse the privileges given them. Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) are software or
                hardware products that automate this monitoring and analysis process.


         2.2.    Why Should I Use Intrusion Detection Systems?
                Intrusion detection allows organizations to protect their systems from the threats that
                come with increasing network connectivity and reliance on information systems.
                Given the level and nature of modem network security threats, the question for
                security professionals should not be whether to use intrusion detection, but which
                intrusion detection features and capabilities to use.

                IDSs have gained acceptance as a necessary addition to every organization's security
                infrastructure. Despite the documented contributions intrusion detection technologies
                make to system security, in many organizations one must still justify the acquisition
                of IDSs. There are several compelling reasons to acquire and use IDSs:

                      1   .   To prevent problem behaviors by increasing the perceived risk of discovery
                              and punishment for those who would attack or otherwise abuse the system,
                     2.       To detect attacks and other security violations that are not prevented by other
                              security measures.


^
    Infidel, Inc., Scotts Valley,   CA
    National Institute of Standards and Technology




                                                          I
                   NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


   3.    To detect and deal with the preambles to attacks (commonly experienced as
         network probes and other "doorknob rattling" activities),
   4.    To document the existing threat to an organization
   5.    To act as quality control for security design and administration, especially of
         large and complex enterprises

   6.    To provide useful information about intrusions that do take place, allowing
         improved diagnosis, recovery, and correction of causative factors.

2.2.1.   Preventing Problems by Increasing the Perceived Risk of
         Discovery and Punishment of Attackers

         A fundamental goal of computer security management is to affect the
         behavior of individual users in a way that protects information systems from
         security problems. Intrusion detection systems help organizations accomplish
         this goal by increasing the perceived risk of discovery and punishment of

         attackers. This serves as a significant deterrent to those who would violate
         security policy.


2.2.2.   Detecting Problems that Are Not Prevented by Other Security
         Measures
         Attackers, using widely publicized techniques, can gain unauthorized access
         to many, if not most systems, especially those connected to public networks.
         This often happens when known vulnerabilities in the systems are not
         corrected.

         Although vendors and administrators are encouraged to address
         vulnerabilities (e.g. through public services such as ICAT,
         http://icat.nist.gov ) lest they enable attacks, there are many situations in
         which this is not possible:

             •   Li many legacy systems, the operating systems cannot be patched or
                 updated.

             •   Even in systems in which patches can be applied, administrators
                 sometimes have neither sufficient time nor resource to track and
                 install all the necessary patches. This is a   common problem,
                 especially in environments that include a large number of hosts or a
                 wide range of different hardware or software environments.
             •   Users can have compelling operational requirements for network
                 services and protocols that are known to be vulnerable to attack.

             •   Both users and administrators make errors in configuring and using
                 systems.

             •   In configuring system access control mechanisms to reflect an
                 organization's procedural computer use policy, discrepancies almost
                 always occur. These disparities allow legitimate users to perform
                 actions that are ill advised or that overstep their authorization.

         In an ideal world, commercial software vendors would minimize
         vulnerabilities in their products, and user organizations would correct all
         reported vulnerabilities quickly and reliably. However, in the real world, this
         seldom happens thanks to our reliance on commercial software where new
         flaws and vulnerabilities are discovered on a daily basis.




                                       2
                  NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


         Given this state of affairs, intrusion detection can represent an excellent
         approach to protecting a system. An IDS can detect when an attacker has
         penetrated a system by exploiting an uncorrected or uncorrectable flaw.
         Furthermore, it can serve an important function in system protection, by
         bringing the fact that the system has been attacked to the attention of the
         administrators who can contain and recover any damage that results. This is
         far preferable to simply ignoring network security threats where one allows
         the attackers continued access to systems and the information on them.


2.2.3.   Detecting the Preambles to Attacks (Often Experienced as
         Network Probes and Other Tests for Existing Vulnerabihties)
         When adversaries attack a system, they typically do so in predictable stages.
         The first stage of an attack is usually probing or examining a system or
         network, searching for an optimal point of entry. In systems with no IDS, the
         attacker is free to thoroughly examine the system with little risk of discovery
         or retribution. Given this unfettered access, a determined attacker will
         eventually find a vulnerability in such a network and exploit it to gain entry
         to various systems.

         The same network with an IDS monitoring its operations presents a much
         more formidable challenge to that attacker. Although the attacker may probe
         the network for weaknesses, the IDS will observe the probes, will identify
         them as suspicious, may actively block the attacker's access to the target
         system, and will alert security personnel who can then take appropriate
         actions to block subsequent access by the attacker. Even the presence of a
         reaction to the attacker's probing of the network will elevate the level of risk
         the attacker perceives, discouraging further attempts to target the network.


2.2.4.   Documenting the Existing Threat
         When you are drawing up a budget for network security, it often helps to
         substantiate claims that the network is likely to be attacked or is even
         currently under attack. Furthermore, understanding the frequency and
         characteristics of attacks allows you to understand what security measures
         are appropriate to protect the network against those attacks.

         IDSs verify, itemize, and characterize the threat from both outside and inside
         your organization's network, assisting you in making sound decisions
         regarding your allocation of computer security resources. Using IDSs in this
         manner is important, as many people mistakenly deny that anyone (outsider
         or insider) would be interested in breaking into their networks. Furthermore,
         the information that IDSs give you regarding the source and nature of attacks
         allows you to make decisions regarding security strategy driven by
         demonstrated need, not guesswork or folklore.


2.2.5.   Quality Control for Security Design and Administration

         When IDSs run over a period of time, patterns of system usage and detected
         problems can become apparent. These can highlight flaws in the design and
         management of security for the system, in a fashion that supports security
         management correcting those deficiencies before they cause an incident.




                                      3
                         NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


       2.2.6.   Providing Useful Information About Actual Intrusions

                Even when EDSs are not able to block attacks, they can still collect relevant,
                detailed, and trustworthy information about the attack that supports incident
                handling and recovery efforts. Furthermore, this information can, under
                certain circumstances, enable and support criminal or civil legal remedies.
                Ultimately, such information can identify problem areas in the organization's
                security configuration or policy.


2.3.   Major Types of IDSs
       There are several types of EDSs available today, characterized by different
       monitoring and analysis approaches. Each approach has distinct advantages and
       disadvantages. Furthermore, all approaches can be described in terms of a generic
       process model for IDSs.


       2.3.1.   Process Model for Intrusion Detection

                Many IDSs can be described in terms of three fundamental functional
                components:

                    •   Information Sources - the different sources of event information
                        used to determine whether an intrusion has taken place. These
                        sources can be drawn from different levels of the system, with
                        network, host, and application monitoring most common.
                    •   Analysis - the part of intrusion detection systems that actually
                        organizes and makes sense of the events derived from the
                        information sources, deciding when those events indicate that
                        intrusions are occurring or have already taken place. The most
                        common analysis approaches are misuse detection and anomaly
                        detection.

                    •   Response - the set of actions that the system takes once it detects
                        intrusions. These are typically grouped into active and passive
                        measures, with active measures involving some automated
                        intervention on the part of the system, and passive measures
                        involving reporting IDS findings to humans, who are then expected
                        to take action based on those reports.


       2.3.2.   How Do I Distinguish Between Different Intrusion Detection
                Approaches?
                There are several design approaches used in Intrusion Detection. These drive
                the features provided by a specific IDS and determine the detection
                capabilities for that system. For those who must evaluate different IDS
                candidates for a given system environment, these approaches can help them
                determine what goals are best addressed by each IDS.


       2.3.3.   Architecture

                The architecture of an IDS refers to how the functional components of the
                IDS are arranged with respect to each other. The primary architectural
                components are the Host, the system on which the IDS software runs, and the
                Target, the system that the IDS is monitoring for problems.




                                            4
                    NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


 2.3.3.1.    Host-Target Co-location
             In early days of IDSs, most IDSs ran on the systems they protected. This
             was due to the fact that most systems were mainframe systems, and the
             cost of computers made a separate IDS system a costly extravagance.
             This presented a problem from a security point of view, as any attacker
             that successfully attacked the target system could simply disable the IDS
             as an integral portion of the attack.


 2.3.3.2.    Host-Target Separation
             With the advent of workstations and personal computers, most IDS
             architects moved towards running the IDS control and analysis systems
             on a separate system, hence separating the IDS host and target systems.
             This improved the security of the IDS as this made it much easier to hide
             the existence of the IDS from attackers.


2.3.4.   Goals
         Although there are many goals associated with security mechanisms in
         general, there are two overarching goals usually stated for intrusion detection
         systems.


 2.3.4.1.    Accountability
             Accountability is the capability to link a given activity or event back to
             the party responsible for initiating it. This is essential in cases where one
             wishes to bring criminal charges against an attacker. The goal statement
             associated with accountability is: "I can deal with security attacks that
             occur on my systems as long as I know who did it ( and where to find
             them.)" Accountability is difficult in TCP/IP networks, where the
             protocols allow attackers to forge the identity of source addresses or
             other source identifiers. It is also extremely difficult to enforce
             accountability in any system that employs weak identification and
             authentication mechanisms.


 2.3.4.2.    Response
             Response is the capability to recognize a given activity or event as an
             attack and then taking action to block or otherwise affect its ultimate
             goal. The goal statement associated with response is "/ don't care who
             attacks my system as long as I can recognize that the attack is taking
            place and block it. " Note that the requirements of detection are quite
             different for response than for accountability.




2.3.5.   Control Strategy

         Control Strategy describes how the elements of an EDS is controlled, and
         furthermore, how the input and output of the IDS is managed.




                                      5
                           NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


           2.3.5.1.   Centralized (Figure 1)
                      Under centralized control strategies, all monitoring, detection and
                      reporting is controlled directly from a central location.




                             Network Information Sources
              Network                           Host-Based                        Application
            Monitoring
                                           A,
                                                Monitoring
                                                                    ,X^^V Monitoring
              Systenn
                                 ^^^^J System                       ^^^\    System




IDS Reporting Links     Monitoring Links            IDS Response Links    Main Network Links


                         Figure 1: Centralized Control




                                                6
                            NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


            2.3.5.2.   Partially Distributed (Figure 2)
                       Monitoring and detection is controlled from a local control node, with
                       hierarchical reporting to one or more central location(s).




                                                                                                   I >   « mmm mum



                                           Main IDS Console


                              Network Information Sources

              Network                                  Host-Based                                         Application
            Monitoring                                  Monitoring                                         Monitoring

 ^^^^^ Systenn                                             Systenn                                            Systenn



                                                                              MMM   HI 11   MM

IDS Reporting Links      Monitoring Links                 IDS Response Links                     Main Network Links
                               mmm mmm mam u mm mmtm mmm wmmm mmm mmm   mmm


                               IDS Master Reporting Links


                   Figure 2: Distributed Control Strategy




                                                      7
                       NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


      2.3.5.3.   Fully Distributed (Figure 3)
                 Monitoring and detection is done using an agent-based approach, where
                 response decisions are made at the point of analysis.




                         Network Information Sources
                                                                             Application
                                                                             Monitoring
                                                                         i
                                                                               Systenn




Monitoring Lini<s                IDS Response Linl<s              Main Network Links


      Figure 3: Fully Distributed (Agent-Based) Control

    2.3.6.   Timing
             Timing refers to the elapsed time between the events that are monitored and
             the analysis of those events.




                                             8
                     NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


 2.3.6.1.    Interval-Based (Batch Mode)
             In interval-based IDSs, the information flow from monitoring points to
             analysis engines is not continuous. In effect, the information is handled
             in a fashion similar to "store and forward" communications schemes.
             Many early host-based IDSs used this timing scheme, as they relied on
             operating system audit trails, which were generated as files. Interval-
             based IDSs are precluded from performing active responses.

 2.3.6.2.    Real-Time (Continuous)
             Real-time IDSs operate on continuous information feeds from
             information sources. This is the predominant timing scheme for network-
             based IDSs, which gather information from network traffic streams. In
             this document, we use the term "real-time" as it is used in process control
             situations. This means that detection performed by a "real-dme" IDS
             yields results quickly enough to allow the IDS to take action that affects
             the progress of the detected attack.


2.3.7.   Information Sources

         The most common way to classify IDSs is to group them by information
         source. Some IDSs analyze network packets, captured from network
         backbones or LAN segments, to find attackers. Other IDSs analyze
         information sources generated by the operating system or application
         software for signs of intrusion.


 2.3.7.1.    Network-Based IDSs
             The majority of commercial intrusion detection systems are network-
             based. These IDSs detect attacks by capturing and analyzing network
             packets. Listening on a network segment or switch, one network-based
             IDS can monitor the network traffic affecting multiple hosts that are
             connected to the network segment, thereby protecting those hosts.

             Network-based IDSs often consist of a set of single-purpose sensors or
             hosts placed at various points in a network. These units monitor network
             traffic, performing local analysis of that traffic and reporting attacks to a

             central management console. As the sensors are limited to running the
             IDS, they can be more easily secured against attack. Many of these
             sensors are designed to run in "stealth" mode, in order to make it more
             difficult for an attacker to determine their presence and location.

            Advantages of Network-Based IDSs:

                 •     A few well-placed network-based IDSs can monitor a large
                       network.

                 •     The deployment of network-based IDSs has little impact upon an
                       existing network. Network-based IDSs are usually passive
                       devices that listen on a network wire without interfering with the
                       normal operation of a network. Thus, it is usually easy to retrofit
                       a network to include network-based IDSs with minimal effort.

                 •     Network-based IDSs can be made very secure against attack and
                       even made invisible to many attackers.




                                       9
                   NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


           Disadvantages of Network-Based IDSs:

               •     Network-based IDSs may have difficulty processing all packets
                     in a large or busy network and, therefore, may fail to recognize
                     an attack launched during periods of high traffic. Some vendors
                     are attempting to solve this problem by implementing IDSs
                     completely in hardware, which is much faster. The need to
                     analyze packets quickly also forces vendors to both detect fewer
                     attacks and also detect attacks with as little computing resource
                     as possible which can reduce detection effectiveness.

               •     Many of the advantages of network-based EDSs don't apply to
                     more modem switch-based networks. Switches subdivide
                     networks into many small segments (usually one fast Ethernet
                     wire per host) and provide dedicated links between hosts
                     serviced by the same switch. Most switches do not provide
                     universal monitoring ports and this limits the monitoring range
                     of a network-based IDS sensor to a single host. Even when
                     switches provide such monitoring ports, often the single port
                     cannot mirror all traffic traversing the switch.

               •     Network-based IDSs cannot analyze encrypted information. This
                     problem is increasing as more organizations (and attackers) use
                     virtual private networks.

               •     Most network-based IDSs cannot tell whether or not an attack
                     was successful; they can only discern that an attack was initiated.
                     This means that after a network-based IDS detects an attack,
                     administrators must manually investigate each attacked host to
                     determine whether it was indeed penetrated.

               •     Some network-based IDSs have problems dealing with network-
                     based attacks that involve fragmenting packets. These
                     malformed packets cause the IDSs to become unstable and crash.

2.3.7.2.   Host-Based IDSs
           Host-based IDSs operate on information collected from within an
           individual computer system. (Note that application-based IDSs are
           actually a subset of host-based IDSs.) This vantage point allows host-
           based IDSs to analyze activities with great reliability and precision,
           determining exactly which processes and users are involved in a
           particular attack on the operating system. Furthermore, unlike network-
           based IDSs, host-based IDSs can "see" the outcome of an attempted
           attack, as they can directly access and monitor the data files and system
           processes usually targeted by attacks.

           Host-based IDSs normally utilize information sources of two types,
           operating system audit trails, and system logs. Operating system audit
           trails are usually generated at the innermost (kernel) level of the

           operating system, and are therefore more detailed and better protected
           than system logs. However, system logs are much less obtuse and much
           smaller than audit trails, and are furthermore far easier to comprehend.
           Some host-based IDSs are designed to support a centralized EDS
           management and reporting infrastructure that can allow a single



                                    10
                   NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


           management console to track many hosts. Others generate messages in
           formats that are compatible with network management systems.

           Advantages:

               •     Host-based IDSs, with their ability to monitor events local to a
                     host, can detect attacks that cannot be seen by a network-based
                     IDS.

               •     Host-based IDSs can often operate in an environment in which
                     network traffic is encrypted, when the host-based information
                     sources are generated before data is encrypted and/or after the
                     data is decrypted at the destination host

               •     Host-based IDSs are unaffected by switched networks.

               •     When Host-based IDSs operate on OS audit trails, they can help
                     detect Trojan Horse or other attacks that involve software
                     integrity breaches. These appear as inconsistencies in process
                     execution.

           Disadvantages:

               •     Host-based IDSs are harder to manage, as information must be
                     configured and managed for every host monitored.

               •     Since at least the information sources (and sometimes part of the
                     analysis engines) for host-based IDSs reside on the host targeted
                     by attacks, the IDS may be attacked and disabled as part of the
                     attack.

               •     Host-based IDSs are not well suited for detecting network scans
                     or other such surveillance that targets an entire network, because
                     the IDS only sees those network packets received by its host.

               •     Host-based IDSs can be disabled by certain denial-of-service
                     attacks.

               •     When host-based IDSs use operating system audit trails as an
                     information source, the amount of information can be immense,
                     requiring additional local storage on the system.

               •     Host-based IDSs use the computing resources of the hosts they
                     are monitoring, therefore inflicting a performance cost on the
                     monitored systems.

2.3.7.3.   Application-Based IDSs
           Application-based IDSs are a special subset of host-based IDSs that
           analyze the events transpiring within a software application. The most
           common information sources used by application -based IDSs are the
           application's transaction log files.

           The ability to interface with the application directly, with significant
           domain or application-specific knowledge included in the analysis
           engine, allows application-based IDSs to detect suspicious behavior due
           to authorized users exceeding their authorization. This is because such




                                    11
                     NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


             problems are more likely to appear in the interaction between the user,
             the data, and the application.

             Advantages:

                 •      Application-based IDSs can monitor the interaction between user
                        and application, which often allows them to trace unauthorized
                        activity to individual users.

                 •      Application-based IDSs can often work in encrypted
                        environments, since they interface with the application at
                        transaction endpoints, where information is presented to users in
                        unencrypted form.

             Disadvantages:

                 •      Application-based IDSs may be more vulnerable than host-based
                        IDSs to attacks as the applications logs are not as well-protected
                        as the operating system audit trails used for host-based EDSs.

                 •      As Application-based IDSs often monitor events at the user level
                        of abstraction, they usually cannot detect Trojan Horse or other
                        such software tampering attacks. Therefore, it is advisable to use
                        an Application-based IDS in combination with Host-based
                        and/or Network-based IDSs.


2.3.8.   IDS Analysis
         There are two primary approaches to analyzing events to detect attacks:
         misuse detection and anomaly detection. Misuse detection, in which the
         analysis targets something known to be "bad", is the technique used by most
         commercial systems. Anomaly detection, in which the analysis looks for
         abnormal patterns of activity, has been, and continues to be, the subject of a
         great deal of research. Anomaly detection is used in limited form by a
         number of IDSs. There are strengths and weaknesses associated with each
         approach, and it appears that the most effective IDSs use mostly misuse
         detection methods with a smattering of anomaly detection components.


 2.3.8.1.    Misuse Detection
             Misuse detectors analyze system activity, looking for events or sets of
             events that match a predefined pattern of events that describe a known
             attack. As the patterns corresponding to known attacks are called
             signatures, misuse detection is sometimes called "signature-based
             detection." The most common form of misuse detection used in
             commercial products specifies each pattern of events corresponding to an
             attack as a separate signature. However, there are more sophisticated
             approaches to doing misuse detection (called "state-based" analysis
             techniques) that can leverage a single signature to detect groups of
             attacks.

            Advantages:

                 •      Misuse detectors are very effective at detecting attacks without
                        generating an overwhelming number of false alarms.




                                        12
                   NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


               •     Misuse detectors can quickly and reliably diagnose the use of a
                     specific attack tool or technique. This can help security managers
                     prioritize corrective measures.

               •     Misuse detectors can allow system managers, regardless of their
                     level of security expertise, to track security problems on their
                     systems, initiating incident handling procedures.

           Disadvantages:

               •     Misuse detectors can only detect those attacks they know about -
                     therefore they must be constantly updated with signatures of new
                     attacks.

               •     Many misuse detectors are designed to use tightly defined
                     signatures that prevent them from detecting variants of common
                     attacks. State-based misuse detectors can overcome this
                     limitation, but are not commonly used in commercial IDSs.


2.3.8.2.   Anomaly Detection
           Anomaly detectors identify abnormal unusual behavior (anomalies) on a
           host or network. They function on the assumption that attacks are
           different from "normal" (legitimate) activity and can therefore be
           detected by systems that identify these differences. Anomaly detectors
           construct profiles representing normal behavior of users, hosts, or
           network connections. These profiles are constructed from historical data
           collected over a period of normal operation. The detectors then collect
           event data and use a variety of measures to determine when monitored
           activity deviates from the norm.

           The measures and techniques used in anomaly detection include:
               •     Threshold detection, in which certain attributes of user and
                     system behavior are expressed in terms of counts, with some
                     level established as permissible. Such behavior attributes can
                     include the number of files accessed by a user in a given period
                     of time, the number of failed attempts to login to the system, the
                     amount of CPU utilized by a process, etc. This level can be
                     static or heuristic (i.e., designed to change with actual values

                     observed over time)

               •     Statistical measures, both parametric, where the distribution of
                     the profiled attributes is assumed to fit a particular pattern, and
                     non -parametric, where the distribution of the profiled attributes
                     is "learned" from a set of historical values, observed over time.


               •     Rule-based measures, which are similar to non-parametric
                     statistical measures in that observed data defines acceptable

                     usage patterns, but differs in that those patterns are specified as
                     rules, not numeric quantities

               •     Other measures, including neural networks, genetic algorithms,
                     and immune system models.

           Only the first two measures are used in current commercial IDSs.




                                     13
                     NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


             Unfortunately, anomaly detectors and the IDSs based on them often
             produce a large number of false alarms, as normal patterns of user and
             system behavior can vary wildly. Despite this shortcoming, researchers
             assert that anomaly-based IDSs are able to detect new attack forms,
             unlike signature-based IDSs that rely on matching patterns of past
             attacks.

             Furthermore, some forms of anomaly detection produce output that can
             in turn be used as information sources for misuse detectors. For example,
             a threshold-based anomaly detector can generate a figure representing
             the "normal" number of files accessed by a particular user; the misuse
             detector can use this figure as part of a detection signature that says "if
             the number of files accessed by this user exceeds this "normal" figure by
             ten percent, trigger an alarm."

             Although some commercial IDSs include limited forms of anomaly
             detection, few, if any, rely solely on this technology.The anomaly
             detection that exists in commercial systems usually revolves around
             detecting network or port scanning. However, anomaly detection remains
             an active intrusion detection research area and may play a greater part in
             future IDSs.

            Advantages:

                 •      IDSs based on anomaly detection detect unusual behavior and
                        thus have the ability to detect symptoms of attacks without
                        specific knowledge of details.

                 •      Anomaly detectors can produce information that can in turn be
                        used to define signatures for misuse detectors.

             Disadvantages:

                 •      Anomaly detection approaches usually produce a large number
                        of false alarms due to the unpredictable behaviors of users and
                        networks.

                 •      Anomaly detection approaches often require extensive "training
                        sets" of system event records in order to characterize normal
                        behavior patterns.




2.3.9.   Response Options for IDSs
         Once IDSs have obtained event information and analyzed it to find
         symptoms of attacks, they generate responses. Some of these responses
         involve reporting results and findings to a pre-specified location. Others
         involve more active automated responses. Though researchers are tempted to
         underrate the importance of good response functions in IDSs, they are
         actually very important. Commercial IDSs support a wide range of response
         options, often categorized as active responses, passive responses, or some
         mixture of the two.




                                       14
                   NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


2.3.9.1.   Active Responses
           Active IDS responses are automated actions taken when certain types of
           intrusions are detected. There are three categories of active responses.

           Collect additional information

           The most innocuous, but at times most productive, active response is to
           collect additional information about a suspected attack. Each of us have
           probably done the equivalent of this when awakened by a strange noise
           at night. The first thing one does in such a situation is to listen more
           closely, searching for additional information that allows you to decide
           whether you should take action.

           In the IDS case, this might involve increasing the level of sensitivity of
           information sources (for instance, turning up the number of events
           logged by an operating system audit trail, or increasing the sensitivity of
           a network monitor to capture all packets, not just those targeting a
           particular port or target system.) Collecting additional information is
           helpful for several reasons. The additional information collected can help
           resolve the detection of the attack (assisting the system in diagnosing
           whether an attack did or did not take place). This option also allows the
           organization to gather information that can be used to support
           investigation and apprehension of the attacker, and to support criminal
           and civil legal remedies.

           Change the Environment
           Another active response is to halt an attack in progress and then block
           subsequent access by the attacker. Typically, EDSs do not have the ability
           to block a specific person's access, but instead block Internet Protocol
           (IP) addresses from which the attacker appears to be coming. It is very
           difficult to block a determined and knowledgeable attacker, but IDSs can
           often deter expert attackers or stop novice attackers by taking the
           following actions:

               •     Injecting TCP reset packets into the attacker's connection to the
                     victim system, thereby terminating the connection

               •     Reconfiguring routers and firewalls to block packets from the
                     attacker's apparent location (IP address or site),

               •     Reconfiguring routers and firewalls to block the network ports,
                     protocols, or services being used by an attacker, and

               •     In extreme situations, reconfiguring routers and firewalls to
                     sever all connections that use certain network interfaces.

           Take Action Against the Intruder

           Some who follow intrusion detection discussions, especially in
           information warfare circles, believe that the first option in active
           response is to take action against the intruder. The most aggressive form
           of this response involves launching attacks against or attempting to
           actively gain information about the attacker's host or site.   However
           tempting it might be, this response is ill advised. Due to legal ambiguities




                                    15
                   NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


           about civil liability, this option can represent a greater risk than the
           attack it is intended to block.

           The first reason for approaching this option with a great deal of caution
                   may be illegal. Furthermore, as many attackers use false
           is that it

           network addresses when attacking systems, it carries with it a high risk
           of causing damage to innocent Internet sites and users. Finally, strike
           back can escalate the attack, provoking an attacker who originally
           intended only to browse a site to take more aggressive action.

           Should an active intervention and traceback of this sort be warranted (as
           in the case of a critical system) human control and supervision of the
           process is advisable.   We strongly recommend that you obtain legal
           advice before pursuing any of these "strike-back" options.


2.3.9.2.   Passive Responses
           Passive IDS responses provide information to system users, relying on
           humans to take subsequent action based on that information. Many
           commercial IDSs rely solely on passive responses.

           Alarms and Notifications

           Alarms and notifications are generated by IDSs to inform users when
           attacks are detected. Most commercial EDSs allow users a great deal of
           latitude in determining how and when alarms are generated and to whom
           they are displayed.

           The most common form of alarm is an onscreen alert or popup window.
           This is displayed on the IDS console or on other systems as specified by
           the user during the configuration of the IDS. The information provided in
           the alarm message varies widely, ranging from a notification that an
           intrusion has taken place to extremely detailed messages outlining the IP
           addresses of the source and target of the attack, the specific attack tool
           used to gain access, and the outcome of the attack.

           Another set of options that are of utility to large or distributed
           organizations are those involving remote notification of alarms or alerts.
           These allow organizations to configure the IDS so that it sends alerts to
           cellular phones and pagers carried by incident response teams or system
           security personnel.

           Some products also offer email as another notification channel. This is
           ill   advised, as attackers often routinely monitor email and might even
           block the message.

           SNMP Traps and Plug-ins
           Some commercial IDSs are designed to generate alarms and alerts,
           reporting them to a network management system. These use         SNMP traps
           and messages to post alarms and alerts to central network management
           consoles, where they can be serviced by network operations personnel.
           Several benefits are associated with this reporting scheme, including the
           ability to adapt the entire network infrastructure to respond to a detected
           attack, the ability to shift the processing load associated with an active




                                     16
                         NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


                    response to a system other than the one being targeted by the attack, and
                    the ability to use common communications channels.


         2.3.9.3.   Reporting and Archiving Capabilities
                    Many, if not all, commercial IDSs provide capabilities to generate
                    routine reports and other detailed information documents.    Some of these
                    can output reports of system events and intrusions detected over a
                    particular reporting period (for example, a week or a month.) Some
                    provide statistics or logs generated by the IDS in formats suitable for
                    inclusion in database systems or for use in report generating packages
                    (An example of such a commonly-supported package is Crystal Reports.)

         2.3.9.4.   Failsafe Considerations for IDS Responses
                    When identifying candidate IDSs for your organization, it is important to
                    consider the failsafe features included by the IDS vendor. Failsafe
                    features are those design features meant to protect the IDS from being
                    circumvented or defeated by an attacker. These represent a necessary
                    difference between standard system management tools and security
                    management tools.

                    There are several areas in the response function that require failsafe
                    measures. For instance, IDSs need to provide silent, reliable monitoring
                    of attackers. Should the response function of an EDS break this silence by
                    broadcasting alarms and alerts in plaintext over the monitored network, it
                    would allow attackers to detect the presence of the IDS. Worse yet, the
                    attackers can directly target the IDS as part of the attack on the victim
                    system.

                    Encrypted tunnels or other cryptographic measures used to hide and
                    authenticate IDS communications are excellent ways to secure and
                    ensure the reliability of the IDS.


2.4.   Tools that Complement IDSs
       Several tools exist that complement IDSs and are often labeled as intrusion detection
       products by vendors since they perform similar functions. This section discusses four
       of these tools. Vulnerability Analysis Systems, File Integrity Checkers, Honey Pots,
       and Padded Cells, and describes how they can enhance an organization's intrusion
       detection capability.


       2.4.1.   Vulnerability Analysis or Assessment Systems

                Vulnerability analysis (also known as vulnerability assessment) tools test to
                determine whether a network or host is vulnerable to known attacks.
                Vulnerability assessment represents a special case of the intrusion detection
                process. The information sources used are system state attributes and
                outcomes of attempted attacks. The information sources are collected by a
                part of the assessment engine. The timing of analysis is interval-based or
                batch-mode, and the type of analysis is misuse detection. This means that
                vulnerability assessment systems are essentially batch mode misuse detectors
                that operate on system state information and results of specified test routines.




                                            17
                   NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


      Vulnerability analysis is a very powerful security management technique, but
                     complement to using an IDS, not as a replacement. Should an
      is suitable as a

      organization rely solely on vulnerability analysis tools to monitor systems, a
      knowledgeable attacker may monitor the vulnerability analysis system, note
      when the information source is collected, and time the attack to fit between
      collection times.

      However, vulnerability analysis systems can reliably generate a "snapshot"
      of the security state of a system at a particular time. Furthermore, as they
      exhaustively test systems for vulnerability to large numbers of known
      attacks, vulnerability analysis systems can allow a security manager to check
      for problems due to human error or to audit the system for compliance with a
      particular system security policy.


2.4.1.1.   Vulnerability Analysis System Process
           The general process for vulnerability assessment is as follows:
               •     A specified set of system attributes is sampled
               •     The results of the sampling are stored in a secure data repository

               •     The results are organized and compared to at least one reference
                     set of data (this set can be a manually specified "ideal
                     configuration" template or a snapshot of the system state
                     generated earlier)

               •     Any differences between the two sets are identified and reported.
           Commercial vulnerability assessment products often optimize this
           process by:

               •     splitting processing loads, running multiple assessment engines
                     in parallel.

               •     using cryptographic mechanisms to do very sensitive and reliable
                     tests of whether particular files or objects have changed
                     unexpectedly.


2.4.1.2.   Vulnerability Analysis Types
           There are two major ways of classifying vulnerability analysis systems,
           first, by the location from which assessment information is gathered, and

           second, by the assumptions regarding the level of trust invested in the
           assessment tool. Those who use the first classification scheme for
           vulnerability assessment classify systems as either network-based or
           host-based. Those who use the second classification scheme, classify
           systems as credentialed or non-credentialed. These terms refer to
           whether the analysis is done with or without system credentials (such as
           passwords or other identification and authentication that grant access to
           the system internals.) In this paper, we will use the first classification
           scheme to describe the different approaches for vulnerability analysis.

           Host-based Vulnerability Analysis

           Host-based vulnerability analysis systems determine vulnerability by
           assessing system data sources such as file contents, configuration
           settings, and other status information. This information is usually




                                     18
                       NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


           accessible using standard system queries and inspection of system
           attributes.      As the information is gathered under the assumption that the
           vulnerability analyzer is granted access to the host, it is also sometimes
           known as credential-based vulnerability assessment. This class of
           assessment is also labeled passive assessment.

           The vulnerabilities best revealed by host-based vulnerability assessment
           are those involving privilege escalation attacks. (Such attacks might seek
           superuser or root privilege on a UNIX system, or administrator access
           on an NT system.)

           Network-Based Vulnerability Analysis

           Network-based vulnerability analysis systems have gained acceptance in
           recent years. These vulnerability analysis systems require a remote
           connection to the target system. They may actually reenact system
           attacks, noting and recording responses to these attacks or simply probe
           different targets to infer weaknesses from their responses. This
           reenactment of attacks or probing can occur regardless of whether one
           has permission to access the target system; hence this is considered non-
           credentialed assessment. Furthermore, as network-based vulnerability
           analysis is defined as actively attacking or scanning the targeted system,
           it is   also sometimes labeled active vulnerability assessment.

           Network-based vulnerability analysis tools are sometimes marketed as
           intrusion detection tools. Although, as discussed earlier in this document,
           this is correct by some definitions of intrusion detection, a vulnerability

           analysis product is not a complete intrusion detection solution for most
           environments.

           There are two methods typically used in network-based vulnerability
           assessment:

                   •     Testing by exploit - in this method, the system reenacts an actual
                         attack.   A status flag is returned indicating whether the attack was
                         successful.

                   •     Inference Methods - in this method, the system doesn't actually
                         exploit vulnerabilities, but looks for the artifacts that successful
                         attacks would leave behind. Examples of inference techniques
                         involve checking version numbers provided by systems as results
                         of queries, checking ports to determine which are open, and
                         checking protocol compliance by making simple requests for
                         status or information.


2.4.1.3.   Advantages and Disadvantages of Vulnerability Analysis
           Advantages

                   •     Vulnerability Analysis is of significant value as a part of a
                         security monitoring system, allowing the detection of problems
                         on systems that cannot support an IDS.

                   •     Vulnerability Analysis Systems provide security-specific testing
                         capabilities for documenting the security state of systems at the




                                           19
                    NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


                      start of a security program and for reestablishing the security

                      baseline whenever major changes occur.

                •     When Vulnerability Analysis Systems are used on a regular
                      schedule, they can reliably spot changes in the security state of a
                      system, alerting security managers to problems that require
                      correction.

                •     Vulnerability Analysis Systems offer a way for security
                      managers and system administrators to double-check any
                      changes they make to systems, assuring that in mitigating one set
                      of security problems, they do not create another set of problems.

            Disadvantages and Issues

                •     Host-based vulnerability analyzers are tightly bound to specific
                      operating systems and applications; they are therefore often more
                      costly to build, maintain, and manage.

                •     Network-based vulnerability analyzers are platform-independent,
                      but less accurate and subject to more false alarms.

                •     Some network-based checks, especially those for denial-of-
                      service attacks, can crash the systems they're testing.

                •     When conducting vulnerability assessment of networks on which
                      intrusion detection systems are running, the IDSs can block
                      subsequent assessments. Worse yet, repeated network-based
                      assessments can "train" certain anomaly-detection-based IDSs to
                      ignore real attacks.

                •     Organizations that use vulnerability assessment systems must
                      take care to assure that their testing is limited to systems within
                      their political or management control boundaries. Privacy issues
                      must be taken into account, especially when employee or
                      customer personal data is included in information sources.


2.4.2.   File Integrity Checkers

            File Integrity Checkers are another class of security tools that
            complement IDSs. They utilize message digest or other cryptographic
            checksums for critical files and objects, comparing them to reference
            values, and flagging differences or changes.

            The use of cryptographic checksums is important, as attackers often alter
            system files, at three stages of the attack.   First, they alter system files as

            the goal of the attack (e.g., Trojan Horse placement), second, they
            attempt to leave back doors in the system through which they can reenter
            the system at a later time, and finally, they attempt to cover their tracks
            so that system owners will be unaware of the attack.

            Although File Integrity Checkers are most often used to determine
            whether attackers have altered system files or executables, they can also
            help determine whether vendor-supplied bug patches or other desired
            changes have been applied to system binaries. They are extremely
            valuable to those conducting a forensic examination of systems that have




                                     20
                     NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


             been attacked, as they allow quick and reliable diagnosis of the footprint
             of an attack. This enables system managers to optimize the restoration of
             service after incidents occur.

             The freeware product. Tripwire ( www.tripwiresecurity.com ) is perhaps
             the best-known example of File Integrity Checkers.


2.4.3.   Honey Pot and Padded Cell Systems
         Several novel additions to the intrusion detection product line are under
         development and may soon become available. It is important to understand
         how these products differ from traditional IDSs and to realize that they are
         not yet widely used.

         Honey pots are decoy systems that are designed to lure a potential attacker
         away from critical systems. Honey pots are designed to:

             •   divert an attacker from accessing critical systems,

             •   collect information about the attacker's activity, and

             •   encourage the attacker to stay on the system long enough for
                 administrators to respond.

         These systems are filled with fabricated information designed to appear
         valuable but that a legitimate user of the system wouldn't access. Thus, any
         access to the honey pot is suspect. The system is instrumented with sensitive
         monitors and event loggers that detect these accesses and collect information
         about the attacker's activities.

         Padded cells take a different approach. Instead of trying to attract attackers
         with tempting data, a padded cell operates in tandem with a traditional IDS.
         When the IDS detects attackers, it seamlessly transfers then to a special
         padded cell host. Once the attackers are in the padded cell, they are contained
         within a simulated environment where they can cause no harm. As in honey
         pots, this simulated environment can be filled with interesting data designed
         to convince an attacker that the attack is going according to plan. As in honey
         pots, padded cells are well-instrumented and offer unique opportunities to
         monitor the actions of an attacker. IDS researchers have used padded cell and
         honey pot systems since the late 1980s, but until recently no commercial
         products have been under development. It is important to seek guidance from
         legal counsel before deciding to use either of these systems in your
         operational environment.

             Advantages:

                 •     Attackers can be diverted to system targets that they cannot
                       damage.

                 •     Administrators have additional time to decide how to respond to
                       an attacker.

                 •     Attackers' actions can be easily and more extensively monitored,
                       with results used to refine threat models and improve system
                       protections.

                 •     Honey pots may be effective at catching insiders who are
                       snooping around a network.




                                      21
                                 NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


                         Disadvantages:

                             •     The legal implications of using such devices are not well defined

                             •     Honey pots and padded cells have not yet been shown to be
                                   generally useful security technologies.

                             •     An expert attacker, once diverted into a decoy system, may
                                   become angry and launch a more hostile attack against an
                                   organization's systems.

                             •     A high level of expertise is needed for administrators and
                                   security managers in order to use these systems.




3.   Advice on Selecting IDS Products
     The wide array of intrusion detection products available today addresses a range of
     organizational security goals and considerations. Given this range of products and features,
     the process of selecting products that represent the best fit for your organization's needs is,
     at times, difficult. The following questions   may be used as guidance when preparing a
     specification for acquiring an intrusion detection product.


     3.1.   Technical and Policy Considerations
            In order to determine which DDSs can be used in your environment, you must first
            consider that environment, in technical, physical, and political terms.


            3.1.1.   What Is Your System Environment?
                     The first hurdle an IDS must clear is that of functioning in your systems
                     environment. This is important, for if an IDS is not designed to
                     accommodate the information sources that are available on your systems, it
                     will not be able to see anything that goes on in your systems, attack or
                     normal activity.

              3.1.1.1.   What are the technical specifications of your systems
                         environment?
                         First, specify the technical attributes of your systems environment.

                         Examples of information specified here would include network diagrams
                         and maps specifying the number and locations of hosts, operating
                         systems for each host, the number and types of network devices such as
                         routers, bridges, and switches, number and types of terminal servers and
                         dialup connections, and descriptors of any network servers, including
                         types, configurations, and application software and versions running on
                         each. If you run any enterprise network management system, specify it
                         here.


              3.1.1.2.   What are the technical specifications of your current security
                         protections?
                         Once you have described the technical attributes of your systems
                         environment, describe the security protections you already have in place.
                         Specify numbers, types, and locations of network firewalls, identification




                                                  22
                  NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


             and authentication servers, data and link encryptors, anti-virus packages,
             access control products, specialized security hardware (such as crypto
             accelerator hardware for web servers), virtual private networks, and any
             other security mechanisms on your systems.


 3.1.1.3.    What are the goals of your enterprise?
             Some IDSs have been developed to accommodate the special needs of
             certain industries or market niches such as electronic commerce, health
             care, or financial markets. Define the functional goals of your enterprise
             (there can be several goals associated with a single organization) that are
             supported by your systems.


 3.1.1.4.    How formal is the system environment and management
             culture in your organization?
             Organizational styles vary, depending on the function of the organization
             and its traditional culture. For instance, military or other organizations
             that deal with national security issues tend to operate with a high degree
             of formality, especially when contrasted with university or other
             academic environments.

             Some IDSs offer features that support enforcement of formal use
             policies, with configuration screens that accept formal expressions of
             policy, and extensive reporting capabilities that do detailed reporting of
             policy violations.


3.1.2.   What Are your Security Goals and Objectives?
         Once you've specified the technical landscape of your organizations systems
         as well as the existing security mechanisms, it's time to articulate the goals
         and objectives you wish to attain by using an IDS.

 3.1.2.1.    Is the primary concern of your organization protecting from
             threat originating outside your organization?
             Perhaps the easiest way to specify security goals is by categorizing your
             organization's threat concerns. First, state, as specifically as possible,
             the concerns that your organization has regarding threat that originates
             outside the organization.


 3.1.2.2.    Is your organization concerned about insider attack?

             Repeat the last step, this time addressing concerns about threat that
             originates from within your organization, encompassing not only the user
             who attacks the system from within (such as a shipping clerk who
             attempts to access and alter the payroll system) but also the authorized
             user who overstep their privileges thereby violating organizational
             security policy or laws (customer service agents who, driven by
             curiosity, access earnings and payroll records for public figures.)


 3.1.2.3.    Does your organization want to use the output of your IDS to
             determine new needs?
             System usage monitoring is sometimes provided as a generic system
             management tool to determine when system assets require upgrading or




                                     23
                            NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


                    replacement. When such monitoring is performed by an IDS, the needs
                    for upgrade can show up as anomalous levels of user activity.


         3.1.2.4.   Does your organization want to use the IDS to maintain
                    managerial control (non-security related) over network usage?
                    In some organizations, there are system use policies that target user
                    behaviors that may be classified as personnel management rather than
                    system security issues. These might include accessing web sites that
                    provide content of questionable taste or value (such as pornography) or
                    using organizational systems to send email or other messages for the
                    purpose of harassing individuals. Some DDSs provide features that
                    accommodate detecting such violations of management controls.

       3.1.3.   What Is Your Existing Security Policy?
                    At this time, you should review your existing organization security
                    policy. This will serve as the template against which features of your IDS
                    will be configured. As such, you may find you need to augment the
                    policy, or else derive the following items from it.


         3.1.3.1.   How is it structured?
                    It is helpful to articulate the goals outlined in the security policy in terms

                    of the standard security goals (integrity, confidentiality, and availability)
                    as well as more generic management goals (privacy, protection from
                    liability, manageability.)



         3.1.3.2.   What are the general job descriptions of your system users?
                    List the general job functions of system users (there are commonly
                    several functions assigned to a single user) as well as the data and
                    network accesses that each function requires.

         3.1.3.3.   Does the policy include reasonable use policies or other
                    management provisions?
                    As mentioned above, many organizations have system use policies
                    included as part of security policies.


         3.1.3.4.   Has your organization deflned processes for dealing with
                    specific policy violations?
                    It is   helpful to have a clear idea of what the organization wishes to do
                    when the IDS detects that a policy has been violated. If the organization
                    doesn't intend to react to such violations, it may not make sense to
                    configure the IDS to detect them. If, on the other hand, the organization
                    wishes to actively respond to such violations, the IDS operational staff
                    should be informed of the organization's response policy so that they can
                    deal with alarms in an appropriate manner.


3.2.   Organizational Requirements and Constraints
       Your organization's operational goals, constraints, and culture will affect the
       selection of IDSs and other security tools and technologies to protect your systems.
       In this section, consider these organizational requirements and limitations.




                                              24
                  NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


3.2.1.   What Are Requirements that Are Levied from Outside the
         Organization?

         Is your organization subject to oversight or review by another organization?

         If so, does that oversight authority require IDSs or other specific system

         security resources?


 3.2.1.1.    Are there requirements for public access to information on
             your organization's systems?
             Do regulations or statutes require that information on your system be
             accessible by the public during certain hours of the day, or during certain
             date or time intervals?


 3.2.1.2.    Are there other security-specific requirements levied by law?
             Are there legal requirements for protection of personal information (such
             as earnings information or medical records) stored on your systems? Are
             there legal requirements for investigation of security violations that
             divulge or endanger that information?


 3.2.1.3.    Are there internal audit requirements for security best
             practices or due diligence?
             Do any of these audit requirements specify functions that the IDS must
             provide or support?


 3.2.1.4.    Is the system subject to accreditation?

             If so, what is the accreditation authority's requirement for IDS or other

             security protection?


 3.2.1.5.    Are there requirements for lavt' enforcement investigation and
             resolution of security incidents?
             Do these specify any IDS functions, especially those having to do with
             collection and protection of IDS logs as evidence?


3.2.2.   What Are Your Organization's Resource Constraints?
         IDSs can protect the systems of an organization, but at a price. It makes little
         sense to incur additional expense for IDS features if your organization does
         not have sufficient systems or personnel to use them.


 3.2.2.1.    What is the budget for acquisition and life cycle support of
             intrusion detection hardware, software, and infrastructure?
             Remember here that the acquisition of IDS software is not the total cost
             of ownership; you may also have to acquire a system on which to run the
             software, specialized assistance in installing and configuring the system,
             and training your personnel.

 3.2.2.2.    Is there sufficient existing staff to monitor an intrusion
             detection system full time?
             Some IDSs are designed under the assumption that systems personnel
             will attend them around the clock. If you do not anticipate having such
             personnel available, you may wish to explore those systems that




                                       25
                          NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


                    accommodate less than full-time attendance or else consider systems that
                    are designed for unattended use.


         3.2.2.3.   Does your organization have authority to instigate changes
                    based on the findings of an intrusion detection system?
                    It is critical that   you and your organization be clear about what you plan
                    to do with the problems uncovered by an IDS. If you are not empowered
                    to handle the incidents that arise as a result of the monitoring, you should
                    consider coordinating your selection and configuration of the IDS with
                    the party who is.


3.3.   IDS Product Features and Quality
       3.3.1.   Is the Product Sufficiently Scalable for Your Environment?

                As mentioned before in this document, many IDSs are not able to scale to
                large or widely distributed enterprise network environments.


       3.3.2.   How Has the Product Been Tested?
                Simply asserting that an IDS has certain capabilities is not sufficient to
                demonstrate that those capabilities are real. You should request additional
                demonstration of the suitability of a particular IDS to your environment and
                goals.


        3.3.2.1.    Has the product been tested against functional requirements?
                    Ask the vendor about the assumptions made regarding the goals and
                    constraints of customer environments.


        3.3.2.2.    Has the product been tested against attack?
                    Ask vendors for details of the security testing to which its products have
                    been subjected. If the product includes network-based vulnerability
                    assessment features, ask also whether test routines that produce system
                    crashes or other denials of service have been identified and flagged in
                    system documentation and interfaces.


       3.3.3.   What Is the User Level of Expertise Targeted by the Product?
                Different IDS vendors target users with different levels of technical and
                security expertise.   Ask the vendor what their assumptions are regarding the
                users of their products.


       3.3.4.   Is the Product Designed to Evolve as the Organization Grows?

                One product design goal that will enhance its value to your organization over
                time is the ability to adapt to your needs over time.

        3.3.4.1.    Can the product adapt to growth in user expertise?
                    Ask here whether the IDS interface can be configured (with shortcut
                    keys, customizable alarm features, and custom signatures) on the fly.
                    Ask also whether these features are documented and supported.




                                                                                                   j




                                                26
                  NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


 3.3.4.2.    Can the product adapt to growth and change of the
             organization's systems infrastructure?
             This question has to do with the ability of the IDS to scale to an
             expanding and increasingly diverse network. Most vendors have
             experience in adapting their products as target networks grow. Ask also
             about commitments to support new protocol standards and platform
             types.


 3.3.4.3.    Can the product adapt to growth and change of the security
             threat environment?
             This question is especially critical given the current Internet threat
             environment, in which 30-40 new attacks are posted to the Web every
             month.


3.3.5.   What Are the Support Provisions for the Product?
         Like other systems, IDSs require maintenance and support over time. In this
         section, these needs are specified.


 3.3.5.1.    What are commitments for product installation and
             conflguration support?
             Many vendors provide expert assistance to customers in installing and
             configuring IDSs; others expect that your own staff will handle these
             functions, and provide only telephone or email help desk functions.


 3.3.5.2.    What are commitments for ongoing product support?
             In this area, ask about the vendor's commitment to supporting your use
             of their IDS product.

            Are subscriptions to signature updates included?

             As most IDSs are misuse-detectors, the value of the product is only as
             good as the signature database against which events are analyzed. Most
             vendors provide subscriptions to signature updates for some period of
             time (a year is typical.)

             How often are subscriptions updated?
             In today's threat environment, in which 30-40 new attacks are published
             every month, this is a critical question.

             How quickly after a new attack is made public will the vendor ship a
             new signature?
             If you are using EDSs to protect highly visible or heavily traveled Internet

             sites, it is especially critical that you receive the signatures for   new
             attacks as soon as possible.

            Are software updates included?
             Most IDSs are software products and therefore subject to bugs and
             revisions. Ask the vendor about software update and bug patch support,
             and determine to what extent they are included in the product you
             purchase.




                                         27
                              NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


                         How quickly will software updates and patches be issued after a
                         problem is reported to the vendor?

                         As software bugs in IDSs can allow attackers to nullify their protective
                         effect, it is extremely important that problems be fixed, reliably and
                         quickly.

                         Are technical support services included? What is the cost?

                         In this category, technical support services mean vendor assistance in
                         tuning or adapting your IDS to accommodate special needs, be they
                         monitoring a custom or legacy system within your enterprise, or
                         reporting IDS results in a custom protocol or format.

                         What are the contact provisions for contacting technical support
                         (email, telephone, online chat, web-based reporting)?

                         The contact provisions will likely tell you whether these technical
                         support services are accessible enough to support incident handling or
                         other time-sensitive needs.

                         Are there any guarantees associated with the IDS?

                         As in other software products, IDSs have traditionally had few
                         guarantees associated with them; however, in an attempt to gain market
                         share, some vendors are initiating guarantee programs.


              3.3.5.3.   What training resources does the vendor provide as part of the
                         product?
                         Once an IDS is selected, installed, and configured, it must still be
                         operated by your personnel. In order for these people to make optimal
                         use of the EDS, they should be trained in its use. Some vendors provide
                         this training as part of the product package.


              3.3.5.4.   What additional training resources are available from the
                         vendor and at what cost?
                         In the case that the IDS vendor does not provide training as part of the
                         IDS package, you should budget appropriately to train your operational
                         personnel.


4.   Deploying IDSs
     Intrusion detection technology is a necessary addition to every large organization's
     computer network security infrastructure. However, given the deficiencies of today's
     intrusion detection products, and the limited security skill level of many system
     administrators, an effective IDS deployment requires careful planning, preparation,
     prototyping, testing, and specialized training.

     NIST suggests performing a thorough requirements analysis, carefully selecting the
     intrusion detection strategy and solution that is compatible with the organization's network
     infrastructure, policies, and resource level.


     4.1.   Deployment Strategy for IDSs
            Organizations should consider a staged deployment of IDSs to allow personnel to
            gain experience and to ascertain how many monitoring and maintenance resources




                                                                                                    i




                                                                                                    I
                         NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


       they will require. The resource requirements for each type of IDS vary widely,
       depending on the organization and systems environment. IDSs require significant
       preparation and ongoing human interaction. Organizations must have appropriate
       security policies, plans, and procedures in place so that personnel know how to
       handle the many and varied alarms IDSs produce.

       We recommend consideration of a combination of network-based IDSs and host-
       based IDSs to protect an enterprise-wide network. We furthermore recommend a
       staged deployment, starting with network-based IDSs as they are usually the simplest
       to install and maintain. Next, protect critical servers with host-based IDSs. Utilize
       vulnerability analysis products on a regular schedule to test IDSs and other security
       mechanisms for proper function and configuration.

       Honey pots and related technologies should be used conservatively and only by
       organizations with a highly skilled technical staff that are willing to experiment with
       leading-edge technology. Furthermore, such techniques should be used only after
       seeking guidance from legal counsel.


4.2.   Deploying Network-Based IDSs

       One question that arises when deploying network-based IDSs is where to locate the
       system sensors. There are many options for placing a network-based IDS with
       different advantages associated with each location:


       4.2.1.   Location: Behind Each External Firewall, in the Network              DMZ




                   Figure 4 - Locations of Network-based IDS sensors




                                           29
                           NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


       Advantages:

           •    Sees attacks, originating from the outside world, that penetrate the network's
                perimeter defenses.

           •    Highlights problems with the network firewall policy or performance

           •    Sees attacks that might target the web server or ftp server, which commonly
                reside in this   DMZ
           •    Even if the incoming attack is not recognized, the IDS can sometimes
                recognize the outgoing traffic that results from the compromised server


       4.2.2.   Location: Outside an External Firewall

       (See Figure 4 - Location 2)

       Advantages:

           •    Documents number of attacks originating on the Internet that target the
                network.

           •    Documents types of attacks originating on the Internet that target the network

       4.2.3.   Location: On Major Network Backbones

       (See Figure 4 - Location 3)

       Advantages:

           •    Monitors a large amount of a network's traffic, thus increasing the possibility
                of spotting attacks.

           •    Detects unauthorized activity by authorized users within the organization's
                security perimeter.


       4.2.4.   Location: On Critical Subnets

       (See Figure 4 - Location 4)

       Advantages:

           •    Detects attacks targeting critical systems and resources.

           •    Allows focusing of limited resources to the network assets considered of
                greatest value.




4.3.   Deploying Host-Based IDSs
       Once network-based IDSs are in place and operational, the addition of host-based
       IDSs can offer enhanced levels of protection for your systems. However, installing
       host-based IDSs on every host in the enterprise can be extremely time-consuming, as
       each IDS has to be installed and configured for each specific host.

       Therefore, we recommend that organizations first install host-based IDSs on critical
       servers. This will decrease overall deployment costs and allow novice personnel to
       focus on alarms generated from the most important hosts. Once the operation of host-
       based IDSs is routine, more security-conscious organizations may consider installing




                                            30
                                   NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


            host-based IDSs on the majority of their hosts. In this case, purchase host-based
            systems that have centraHzed management and reporting functions. These features
            will significantly reduce the complexity of managing alerts from a large set of hosts.

            Another consideration when using host-based IDSs is that of allowing operators to
            become familiar with the IDS in a sheltered, but active environment. Much of the
            effectiveness of any IDS, but particularly a host-based IDS depends on the operator's
            ability to discern between true and false alarms. Over a period of time, an operator,
            working with an IDS in a particular environment, will gain a sense of what is normal
            for that environment, as monitored by the IDS.

            It is   also important (as host-based IDSs are often not continuously attended by
            operators) to establish a schedule for checking the results of the IDS. If this is not
            done, the risk that an adversary will tamper with the IDS in the course of an attack
            increases.


     4.4.   Alarm Strategies
            Finally, when deploying IDSs, the questions of which IDS alarm features to use and
            when are important issues. Most IDSs come with configurable alarm features, which
            allow a wide variety of alarm options, including email, paging, network management
            protocol traps, and even automated blocking of attack sources.

            Although these features may be appealing, it is important to be conservative about
            using them until you have a stable EDS installation and some sense of the behavior of
            the EDS within your environment. Some experts recommend not activating IDS
            alarms for as long as several months after installation.

            In cases where the alarm and response features include automated response to
            attacks, specifically those that allow the IDS to direct the firewall to block traffic
            from the ostensible sources of the attacks, be extremely careful that attackers do not
            abuse this feature to deny access to legitimate users.


5.   Strengths and Limitations of IDSs
     Although Intrusion Detection Systems are a valuable addition to an organization's security
     infrastructure, there are things they do well, and other things they do not do well. As you
     plan the security strategy for your organization's systems, it is important for you to
     understand what IDSs should be trusted to do and what goals might be better served by
     other types of security mechanisms.


     5.1.   Strengths of Intrusion Detection Systems
            Intrusion detection systems perform the following functions well:

                    •   Monitoring and analysis of system events and user behaviors

                    •   Testing the security states of system configurations

                    •   Baselining the security state of a system, then tracking any changes to that
                        baseline

                    •   Recognizing patterns of system events that correspond to known attacks

                    •   Recognizing patterns of activity that statistically vary from normal activity




                                                    31
                                NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


                 •   Managing operating system audit and logging mechanisms and the data they
                     generate

                 •   Alerting appropriate staff by appropriate means when attacks are detected.

                 •   Measuring enforcement of security policies encoded in the analysis engine

                 •   Providing default information security policies

                 •   Allowing non-security experts to perform important security monitoring
                     functions.


     5.2.    Limitations of Intrusion Detection Systems
             hitrusion detection systems cannot perform the following functions:

                 •   Compensating for weak or missing security mechanisms in the protection
                     infrastructure. Such mechanisms include firewalls, identification and
                     authentication, link encryption, access control mechanisms, and virus
                     detection and eradication.

                 •   Instantaneously detecting, reporting, and responding to an attack, when there
                     is a heavy network or processing load.


                 •   Detecting newly published attacks or variants of existing attacks.

                 •   Effectively responding to attacks launched by sophisticated attackers

                 •   Automatically investigating attacks without human intervention.

                 •   Resisting attacks that are intended to defeat or circumvent them

                 •   Compensating for problems with the fidelity of information sources

                 •   Dealing effectively with switched networks.


6.   Advice on Dealing with IDS Output
     6.1.    Typical IDS Output
     Almost all IDSs will output a small summary line about each detected attack. This
     summary line typically contains the information fields shown below. See the Glossary
     (Appendix C) for a definition of any unfamiliar terms.

         •    time/date,

         •     sensor IP address,

         •    vendor specific attack name,

         •    standard attack name (if one exists),

         •     source and destination IP address,

         •    source and destination port numbers, and

         •    network protocol used by attack.

     Many EDSs will also provide a generic description of each type of attack. This description
     is important as it enables the operator to correctly gauge the impact of the attack.


     This description usually contains the following information:




                                                 32
                               NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


         •     text description of attack,

         •     attack severity level,

         •     type of loss experienced as a result of the attack,

         •     the type of vulnerability the attack exploits,

         •     list of software types and version   numbers that are vulnerable to the attack,

         •     patch information so that computers can be made invulnerable to the attack, and

         •     references to public advisories about the attack or the vulnerability it exploits.


     6.2.    Handling Attacks
             Perhaps the best advice anyone can give regarding successfully handling IDS outputs
             indicating the detection of an attack is "Be Prepared."    Your organization should
             have Incident Handling Plans and Procedures, which set forth the organization's
             procedures for handling security incidents, such as viruses, insider abuse of systems,
             and attacks.

             This Incident Handling Plan and Procedure should, at a minimum, assign roles and
             responsibilities for all parties within the organization, outline the actions that are to
             be taken when an incident occurs, and establish schedules and content for training
             everyone about their responsibilities in the incident handling process. Furthermore,
             you should make provisions to conduct periodic tests (similar to fire drills) of the
             procedures, in which all organizational parties step through their specific
             responsibilities and assignments. Take the time to train your IDS operators on the
             organization's Incident Handling Procedure. If the Procedure predates the addition
             of the IDS to your security infrastructure, consider taking the time to revisit it,
             amending it to reflect the role of the EDS. In particular, key the actions prescribed in
             the procedure to the messages provided by the IDS.



7.   Computer Attacks and Vulnerabilities
     Many organizations acquire intrusion detection systems (IDSs) because they know that
     IDSs are a necessary complement to a comprehensive system security architecture.
     However, given the relative youth of commercial IDSs, most organizations lack
     experienced IDS operators. Despite vendors claims about ease of usage, such training or
     experience is absolutely necessary. An IDS is only as effective as the human operating it.

     IDSs user interfaces vary greatly in quality. Some produce responses in the form of cryptic
     text logs while others provide graphical depictions of the attacks on the network. Despite
     this wide variance in display techniques, most IDSs output the same basic information

     about computer attacks. If users understand this common set of outputs, they can quickly
     learn to use the majority of commercial IDSs.


     7.1.    Attack Types
     Most computer attacks only corrupt a system's security in very specific ways. For example,
     certain attacks may enable an attacker to read specific files but don't allow alteration of any
     system components. Another attack may allow an attacker to shut down certain system
     components but doesn't allow access to any files. Despite the varied capabilities of
     computer attacks, they usually result in violation of only four different security properties:
     availability, confidentiality, integrity, and control. These violations are described below.




                                                    33
                              NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


Confidentiality: An attack causes a confidentiality violation if it allows attackers to access
data without authorization (either implicit or explicit) from the owner of the information.

Integrity:   An attack causes an integrity violation if it allows the (unauthorized) attacker to
change the system state or any data residing on or passing through a system

Availability: An attack causes an availability violation if it keeps an authorized user (human
or machine) from accessing a particular system resource when, where, and in the form that
they need it.

Control: An attack causes a control violation if it grants an (unauthorized) attacker
privilege in violation of the access control policy of the system. This privilege enables a
subsequent confidentiality, integrity, or availability violation.


7.2.   Types of Computer Attacks Commonly Detected by IDSs
Three types of computer attacks are most commonly reported by IDSs: system scanning,
denial of service (DOS), and system penetration. These attacks can be launched locally, on
the attacked machine, or remotely, using a network to access the target. An IDS operator
must understand the differences between these types of attacks, as each requires a different
set of responses.


       7.2.1.        Scanning Attacks
       A scanning attack occurs when an attacker probes a target network or system by
       sending different kinds of packets. (This is similar to the activity described in Section
       2.4.1.2   ,   regarding network-based vulnerability analysis tools. Indeed, the techniques
       may be identical, but the motive for performing the activity is quite different!)
       Using the responses received from the target, the attacker can learn many of the
       system's characteristics and vulnerabilities. Thus, a scanning attack acts as a target
       identification tool for an attacker. Scanning attacks do not penetrate or otherwise
       compromise systems. Various names for the tools used to perform these activities
       include: network mappers, port mappers, network scanners, port scanners, or
       vulnerability scanners. Scanning attacks may yield:

             •       The topology of a target network

             •       The types of network traffic allowed through a firewall

             •       The active hosts on the network

             •       The operating systems those hosts are running

             •       The server software they are running
             •       The software version numbers for all detected software
       Vulnerability scanners are a special type of scanner that check for specific
       vulnerabilities in hosts. Thus, an attacker can run a vulnerability scanner and it will
       output a list of hosts (IP addresses) that are likely to be vulnerable to a specific
       attack.

       With this information, an attacker can precisely identify victim systems on the target
       network along with specific attacks that can be used to penetrate those systems. Thus,
       attackers use scanning software to "case" a target before launching a real attack.
       Unfortunately for victims, just as it is legal for a person to enter a bank and to survey
       the visible security system, some lawyers say that it is legal for an attacker to scan a




                                                34
                  NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


host or network. From the perspective of someone performing a scan, they are legally
scouring the Litemet to find publicly accessible resources.

There are legitimate justifications for scanning activity. Web search engines may
scan the hitemet looking for new web pages. An individual may scan the hitemet
looking for free music repositories or for publicly accessible multi-user games.
Fundamentally, the same kind of technology that allows one to discover publicly
available resources also allows one to analyze a system for security weaknesses (as
occurs, as mentioned above, when one uses vulnerability assessment tools). The best
IDS signatures for malicious scanning are usually able to discern between legitimate
and malicious scanning. Scanning is likely the most common attack as it is the
precursor to any serious penetration attempt. If your network is connected to the
Internet, it is almost certain that you are scanned, if not daily, at least a couple of
times a week.


7.2.2.   Denial of Service Attacks

Denial Of Service (DOS) attacks attempt to slow or shut down targeted network
systems or services. In certain Internet communities, DOS attacks are common. For
example, Internet Relay Chat users engaged in verbal disputes commonly resort to
DOS attacks to win arguments with their opponents. While often used for such trivial
purposes, DOS attacks can also be used to shut down major organizations. In well-
publicized incidents, DOS attacks were charged with causing major losses to
electronic commerce operations, whose customers were unable to access them to
make purchases. There are two main types of DOS attacks: flaw exploitation and
flooding. It is important for an IDS operator to understand the difference between
them.


  7.2.2.1.   Flaw exploitation DOS attacks
             Flaw exploitation attacks exploit a flaw in the target system's software in
             order to cause a processing failure or to cause it to exhaust system
             resources. An example of such a processing failure is the 'ping of death'
             attack. This attack involved sending an unexpectedly large ping packet to
             certain Windows systems. The target system could not handle this
             abnormal packet, and a system crash resulted. With respect to resource
             exhaustion attacks, the resources targeted include CPU time, memory,
             disk space, space in a special buffer, or network bandwidth. In many
             cases, simply patching the software can circumvent this type of     DOS
             attack.


  7.2.2.2.   Flooding DOS attacks
             Flooding attacks simply send a system or system component more
             information than it can handle. In cases where the attacker cannot send a
             system sufficient information to overwhelm its processing capacity, the
             attacker may nonetheless be able to monopolize the network connection
             to the target, thereby denying anyone else use of the resource. With these
             attacks, there is no flaw in the target system that can be patched. This is
             why such attacks represent a major source of frustration and concern to
             organizations. While there are few general solutions to stop flooding
             attacks, there are several technical modifications that can be made by a
             target to mitigate such an attack.




                                     35
                      NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


              The term "distributed DOS" (DDOS) is a subset of DOS attacks. DDOS
              attacks are simply flooding   DOS attacks where the attacker uses multiple
              computers to launch the attack. These attacking computers are centrally
              controlled by the attacker's computer and thus act as a single immense
              attack system. An attacker cannot usually bring down a major e-
              commerce site by flooding it with network packets from a single host.
              However, if an attacker gains control of 20,000 hosts and subverts them
              to run an attack under his direction, then the attacker has a formidable
              capability to successfully attack the fastest of systems, bringing it to a
              halt.



7.2.3.   Penetration Attacks

Penetration attacks involve the unauthorized acquisition and/or alteration of system
privileges, resources, or data. Consider these integrity and control violations as
contrasted to DOS attacks that violate the availability of a resource and to scanning
attacks, which don't do anything illegal.   A penetration attack can gain control of a
system by exploiting a variety of software flaws. The most common flaws and the
security consequences of each are explained and enumerated below.

While penetration attacks vary tremendously in details and impact, the most common
types are:

User to Root: A local user on a host gains complete control of the target host

Remote to User. An attacker on the network gains access to a user account on the
target host

Remote to Root: An attacker on the network gains complete control of the target host

Remote Disk Read: An attacker on the network gains the ability to read private data
files on the target host without the authorization of the owner


Remote Disk Write: An attacker on the network gains the ability to write to private
data files on the target host without the authorization of the owner


7.2.4.   Remote vs. Local Attacks
DOS and penetration attacks come in two varieties: local and remote.
  7.2.4.1     Authorized user attack:
              Authorized user attacks are those that start with a legitimate user account
              on the target system. Most authorized user attacks involve some sort of
              privilege escalation.


  7.2.4.1     Public user attack:
              Public user attacks, on the other hand, are those launched without any
              user account or privileged access to the target system. Public user attacks
              are launched remotely through a network connection using only the
              public access granted by the target.

One typical attack strategy calls for an attacker to use a public user attack to gain
initial access to a system. Then, once on the system, the attacker uses authorized user

attacks to take complete control of the target.




                                      36
                     NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


7.2.5.     Determining Attacker Location from IDS Output
In notifications of a detected attack, IDSs will often report the location of a attacker.
This location is most commonly expressed as an source IP address. The reported
address is simply the source address that appears in the attack packets. As attackers
routinely change IP addresses in attack packets, this does not necessarily represent
the true source address of the attacker.

The key to determining the significance of the reported source IP address is to
classify the type of attack and then determine whether or not the attacker needs to see
the reply packets sent by the victim.

 If the attacker launches a one-way attack, like   many flooding DOS attacks, where
the attacker does not need to see any reply packets, then the attacker can label his
packets with random IP addresses. The attacker is doing the real world equivalent of
sending a postcard with a fake return address to fill a mailbox so that no other mail
can fit into it. In this case, the attacker cannot receive any reply from the victim.

However, if the attacker needs to see the victim's replies, which is usually true with
penetration attacks, then the attacker usually cannot lie about his source IP address.
Using the postcard analogy, the attacker needs to know that his postcards got to the
victim and therefore must usually label his postcards with his actual address.

In general, attackers must use the correct IP address when launching penetration
attacks but not with   DOS attacks.
However, there exists one caveat when dealing with expert attackers. An attacker can
send attack packets using a fake source IP address, but arrange to wiretap the victims
reply to the faked address. The attacker can do this without having access to the
computer at the fake address. This manipulation of IP addressing is called "IP
Spoofing."


7.2.6.     IDSs and Excessive Attack Reporting
Many IDS operators are overwhelmed with the number of attacks reported by IDSs.
It is   simply impossible for an operator to investigate the hundreds or even thousands
of attacks that are reported daily by some IDSs. The underlying problem is not in the
number of attacks, but how IDSs report those attacks.

Some IDSs report a separate attack each time an attacker accesses a different host.
Thus, an attacker scanning a subnet of a thousand hosts could trigger a thousand
attack reports. Some vendors have proposed a solution to this problem. Their newest
IDSs are beginning to effectively combine redundant entries and to present to the
operator those attacks of highest importance first.


  7.2.6.1.     Attack naming conventions
           Until recently, there was no common naming convention for computer
           attacks or vulnerabilities. This made it very difficult to compare the
           effectiveness of different IDSs as each vendor's IDS generated a different list
           of results when analyzing events reflecting the same set of attacks. This also
           made it difficult to coordinate the use of more than one type of IDS in a
           network, as different IDSs would generate different messages when they
           detected the same attack.




                                       37
                         NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


                Fortunately, there are efforts underway within the network security
                community to devise a common nomenclature for computer vulnerabilities
                and attacks. The most popular of these is the Common Vulnerabilities and
                Exposures List (CVE) and is maintained by MITRE with input from a variety
                of security professionals worldwide. Many network security product vendors
                have agreed to make their products CVE-compatible. The CVE list can be
                searched and viewed using NIST's ICAT vulnerability index:
                http://icat.nist.gov/ The main CVE web site is: http://cve.mitre.org
                                    .                                                 .




         7.2.6.2.   Attack severity levels
                Many IDSs assign a severity level to detected attacks. They do this to help
                IDS operators accurately assess the impact of an attack, so that appropriate
                actions can be taken. However, the impact and severity of an attack are
                highly subjective, and are not necessarily one and the same, depending upon
                the target network and environment of the organization that hosts that
                network. For example, if an attacker launches a highly effective Unix attack
                against a large heterogeneous network, the impact of the attack for a network
                segment that is exclusively Windows-based may be low, while the impact of
                the attack on the entire network (and thus the severity of the attack) remains
                high. Thus, the severity levels reported by IDSs are useful information for
                security managers, but must be considered in the context of the specific
                system environment in which the IDS is running.


7.3.   Types of Computer Vulnerabilities
Many IDSs provide a description of the attacks that they detect, which will often include
the type of vulnerability that the attack is exploiting. This information is extremely useful
after an attack has occurred so that a systems administrator can research and correct the
exploited vulnerability. NIST recommends the use of the ICAT Metabase project for
researching and fixing vulnerabilities in organization's networks. ICAT will give readers
thousands of examples of real world computer vulnerabilities with links to detailed
descriptions and fix information. ICAT is available at http://icat.nist.gov   .




In this section, we will discuss the major types of vulnerabilities. Many different schemes
have been proposed to classify vulnerabilities and we shall not enumerate them here.
However, some standard terminology has developed. Below is a list of some of the more
common vulnerability types.

       7.3.1.   Input Validation Error:

       In an input validation error, the input received by a system is not properly checked,
       resulting in a vulnerability that can be exploited by sending a certain input sequence.
       There are two important types of input validation errors: buffer overflow and
       boundary condition errors.

         7.3.1.1.   Buffer overflow (subset of input validation errors):
                In a buffer overflow, the input received by a system is longer than the
                expected input length but the system does not check for this condition. The
                input buffer fills up and overflows the memory allocated for the input. By
                cleverly constructing this extra input, an attacker can cause the system to
                execute instructions on behalf of the attacker.   An example of a buffer
                overflow vulnerability is the fingerd exploit, in which an attacker sends a




                                            38
                  NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


         Unix finger command to a system, with an argument that is longer than the
         80(?) characters allocated.


  7.3.1.2.   Boundary condition error (subset of input validation errors):
         In a boundary condition error, the input being received by a system, be it
         human or machine generated, causes the system to exceed an assumed
         boundary. The overrun thereby represents a vulnerability. For example, the
         system may run out of memory, disk space, or network bandwidth. Another
         example is that a variable might reach its maximum value and roll over to its
         minimum value. Yet another example is that the variables in an equation
         might be set such that a division by zero error occurs. A boundary condition
         error is a subset of the class of input validation errors. While it could be
         argued that buffer overflow is a type of boundary condition error, we put
         buffer overflow in a distinct category given its commonality and importance.


7.3.2.   Access Validation Error:

In an access validation error, the system is vulnerable because the access control
mechanism is faulty. The problem lies not with the user controllable configuration of
the access control mechanism but with the mechanism itself


7.3.3.   Exceptional Condition Handling Error:

In an exceptional condition handling error, the system somehow becomes vulnerable
due to an exceptional condition that has arisen. The handling (or mishandling) of the
exception by the system enables a vulnerability.


7.3.4.   Environmental Error:
In an environmental error, the environment in which a system is installed somehow
causes the system to be vulnerable. This may be due, for example, to an unexpected
interaction between an application and the operating system or between two
applications on the same host. Such a vulnerable system may be perfectly configured
and provably secure in the developers test environment, but the installation
environment somehow violates the developer's security assumptions.


7.3.5.   Configuration Error:

A configuration error occurs when user controllable settings in a system are set such
that the system is vulnerable. This vulnerability is not due to how the system was
designed but on how the end user configures the system. We consider it a
configuration error when a system ships from a developer with a weak configuration.


7.3.6.   Race Condition:
Race conditions occur when there is a delay between the time when a system checks
to see if an operation is allowed by the security model and the time when the system
actually performs the operation. The real problem is when the environment changes
between the time the security check is performed and when the operation is
performed, such that the security model no longer allows the operation. Attackers
take advantage of this small window of opportunity and convince systems to perform
illegal operations like writing to the password file while in the high-privilege state.




                                       39
                                   NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


8.       The Future of IDSs
         Although the system audit function that represents the original vision of IDSs has been a
         formal discipline for almost fifty years, the IDS research field is still young, with most
         research dating to the 1980s and 1990s. Furthermore, the wide-scale commercial use of
         IDSs did not start until the mid-1990s.

         However, the Intrusion Detection and Vulnerability Assessment market has grown into a
         significant commercial presence. Technology market analysts predict continued growth in
         the demand for IDS and other network security products and services for the foreseeable
                                                                                  ^
         future (with IDS product sales projected to reach $978 million by 2003.)

         Even while the IDS research field is maturing, commercial IDSs are still in their formative
         years. Some commercial IDSs have received negative publicity due to their large number
         of false alarms, awkward control and reporting interfaces, overwhelming numbers of attack
         reports, lack of scalability, and lack of integration with enterprise network management
         systems. However, the strong commercial demand for IDSs will increase the likelihood that
         these problems will be successfully addressed in the near future.

         We anticipate that the improvement over time in quality of performance of IDS products
         will likely parallel that of anti-virus software. Early anti-virus software created false alarms
         on many normal user actions and did not detect all known viruses. However, over the past
         decade, anti-virus software has progressed to its current state, in which it is transparent to
         users, yet so effective that few doubt its effectiveness.

         Furthermore, it is very likely that certain IDS capabilities will become core capabilities of
         network infrastructure (such as routers, bridges and switches) and operating systems. In this
         case, the IDS product market will be able to better focus its attention on resolving some of
         the pressing issues associated with the scalability and manageability of IDS products.

         There are other trends in computing that we believe will affect the form and function of
         IDS products including the move to appliance-based IDSs. It is also likely that certain IDS
         pattern-matching capabilities will move to hardware in order to increase bandwidth.
         Finally, the entry of insurance and other classic commercial risk management measures to
         the network security arena will drive enhanced IDS requirements for investigative support
         and features.


9.       Conclusion
         IDSs are here to stay, with billion dollar firms supporting the development of commercial
         security products and driving hundreds of millions in annual sales. However, they remain
         difficult to configure and operate and often can't be effectively used by the very novice
         security personnel who need to benefit from them most. Due to the nationwide shortage of
         experienced security experts, many novices are assigned to deal with the IDSs that protect
         our nation's computer systems and networks. Our intention, in writing this document, is to
         help those who would take on this task.

         We hope that this publication, in providing actionable information and advice on the topics,
         serves to acquaint novices with the world of IDSs and computer attacks. The information
         provided in this bulletin is by no means complete and we recommend further reading and
         formal training before one takes on the task of configuring and using an intrusion detection
         system.



^
    International Data Corporation, 2000.




                                                    40
                                NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems




Appendix A - Frequently Asked Questions about IDSs
1.   What is intrusion detection?
     Intrusion detection is the process of monitoring the events occurring in a computer
     system or network and analyzing them for signs of intrusions, defined as attempts to
     compromise the confidentiality, integrity, or availability of a computer or network.
2.   What is an intrusion detection system (IDS)?
     An intrusion detection system is a software or hardware device that automates the
     intrusion detection process.

3.   How do IDSs work?
     Intrusion detection systems are made up of three functional components, information
     sources, analysis, and response.   The system obtains event information from one or
     more information sources, performs a pre-configured analysis of the event data, and
     then generates specified responses, ranging from reports to active intervention when
     intrusions are detected.

4.   Why should I use an IDS, especially when I already have firewalls, anti virus
     tools, and other security protections on       my system?
     Each security protection serves to address a particular security threat to your system.
     Furthermore, each security protection has weak and strong points. Only by combining
     them (this combination is sometimes called security in depth) do you protect from a
     realistic range of security attacks.

     Firewalls serve as barrier mechanisms, barring entry to some kinds of network traffic
     and allowing others, based on a firewall policy. IDSs serve as monitoring
     mechanisms, watching activities, and making decisions about whether the observed
     events are suspicious. They can spot attackers circumventing firewalls and report
     them to system administrators, who can take steps to prevent damage.
5.   What are the different types of IDSs?
     There are many ways of describing IDSs. The primary descriptors are the system
     monitoring approaches, the analysis strategy and the timing of information sources
     and analysis. The system monitoring approaches are network-based, host-based, and
     applications-based. The analysis strategies are misuse detection and anomaly
     detection. The timing categories are interval-based (or batch mode) and real-time.
     The most common commercial IDSs are real-time network-based systems.
6.   How do I select the best IDS for my organization?
     The best IDS for your organization is the IDS that best satisfies the security goals and
     objectives of your organization, given the constraints of the organization. Governing
     factors are usually defined as the following:

     •   System environment, in terms of hardware and software architectures.
     •   Security environment, in terms of policy, existing security mechanisms, and
         constraints.




                                               41
                              NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


     •   Organizational goals, in terms of functional goals of the enterprise (for instance,
         e-commerce organizations might have different goals and constraints from
         manufacturing organizations.)
     •   Resource constraints, in terms of acquisition, staffing, and infrastructure.
7.   What are the limitations of IDSs?
     DDSs have many limitations. These are the major ones:
     •   They aren't scalable to large or distributed enterprise networks.
     •   They can be difficult to manage, with awkward user control and alarm display
         interfaces

     •   Different commercial IDSs rarely interoperate with each other, so you may not be
         able to consolidate your IDSs across your enterprise if you use more than one
         vendor's IDS.

     •   Commercial IDSs rarely interoperate with other security or network management
         packages
     •   There are significant error rates, especially false positives, in IDS results. These
         can take up a great deal of a security staff's time and resource.
     •   They cannot compensate for significant deficiencies in your organizations
         security strategy, policy, or security architecture.

     •   They cannot compensate for security weaknesses in network protocols
     •   They cannot substitute for other types of security mechanisms (such as
         Identification and Authentication, encryption, single sign on, firewalls, or access
         control)

     •   They cannot, by themselves, completely protect a system from all security threats
8.   What is the difference between vulnerability analysis systems and intrusion
     detection systems?
     Vulnerability analysis systems are very similar to intrusion detection systems, as they
     both look for specific symptoms of intrusions and other security policy violations.
     However, vulnerability analysis systems take a static view of such symptoms,
     whereas intrusion detections look at them dynamically. This is the difference between
     taking a snapshot of an incident versus video taping it.

9.   How can the two systems interact?
     Consider this analogy: Intrusion Detection Systems are analogous to security
     monitoring cameras. Standard IDSs perform real-time continuous monitoring and
     analysis of event data; hence they are analogous to cameras that record video images.
     Vulnerability assessment systems perform interval-based monitoring and analysis of
     system state; hence they are analogous to cameras that take snapshots. Vulnerability
     assessment systems can determine whether there is a problem at a particular point in
     time, and can furthermore make this determination for a modest investment of time
     and processing load. IDSs can, on the other hand, tell very reliably whether there are
     problems over a time interval, and furthermore tell the conditions that enabled the
     problem, as well as the damage caused by the problem.




                                               42
                                  NIST Special Publication 800-31, Intrusion Detection Systems


Appendix B - IDS Resources
Acquiring, deploying, and maintaining an IDS is a complex task. Fortunately, many
excellent resources in the form of books and seminars exist to guide the public on IDS
technology. Several free IDS resources are available:

1.   For a survey of commercially available IDSs that allows one to easily compare
     features, read the "Intrusion Detection System Product Survey" published by the Los
     Alamos National Laboratory and found at http://lib-www.lanl.gov/la-
     pubs/004 16750.pdf   .




2.   NIST's ICAT vulnerability index allows you to search for information about specific
     vulnerabilities. It is found at: http://csrc.nist.gov/icat
                                                             .




3.   Information on the computer attacks that EDSs detect can be found in the May 1999
     ITL Bulletin entitled "Computer Attacks: What They Are and How to Defend Against
     Them", available at http://www.nist.gov/itl/lab/bulletns/cslbull 1 .htm .




4.   Snort is a lightweight network intrusion detection system, which can perform a
     variety of traffic logging and analysis functions on IP networks. It is a freeware
     product, available under the terms of the    GNU General Public License as published
     by the Free Software Foundation. Snort has an extensive database of over a thousand
     attack signatures. Both Snort and the attack signature database are found at
     http://www.snort.org     .




5.   The Center for Education and Research in Information Assurance and Security
     (CERIAS) at Purdue University, has produced many widely-used network security
     tools, including the first widely used vulnerability assessment tool, COPS, and the

     first widely-used file integrity checker. Tripwire.   CERIAS has an extensive ftp
     repository of freeware tools for security managers, including many intrusion detection
     and vulnerability assessment tools. All are found at http://www.cerias.purdue.edu    .




6.   SecurityFocus.com has a web-accessible reference site for intrusion detection, that
     features news, information, discussions, and tools. It is found at
     http://www.securityfocus.com
7.   Talisker's Network Security Tool Site has an extensive, well-maintained reference
     library of commercial IDS products. It is found at http://www.networkintrusion.co.uk     .




8.   There are several books available on intrusion detection, including:
        •   Bace, Rebecca G., Intrusion Detection, Macmillan Technical Publishing,
                2000.

        •   Amoroso, Edward G., Intrusion Detection: An Introduction to Internet
                Surveillance, Correlation, Trace Back, Traps, and Response, Intrusion.net,

                1999.

        •   Northcutt, Stephen, Network Intrusion Detection: An Analyst's Handbook,

                New Riders, 1999.




                                                 43
                                    Technical Publications

Periodical

                                                                                          —
Journal of Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Reports NIST research
and development in metrology and related fields of physical science, engineering, applied mathematics,
statistics, biotechnology, and information technology. Papers cover a broad range of subjects, with major

emphasis on measurement methodology and the basic technology underlying standardization. Also included
from time to time are survey articles on topics closely related to the Institute's technical and scientific
programs. Issued six times a year.



Nonperiodicals

Monographs   —Major                                       on
                         contributions to the technical literature      various subjects related to the
                    and
Institute's scientific     technical activities.

Handbooks—Recommended codes of engineering and                                           codes)
                                                              industrial practice (including safety              devel-
oped  incooperation with                                               and regulatory
                             interested industries, professional organizations,                        bodies.
Special Publications—Include proceedings of conferences sponsored by NIST, NIST annual            and      reports,
other                    appropriate
      special publications                grouping such
                                          to this          wall    as   pocket
                                                                             charts,  and     cards,       bibliographies.

National Standard Reference Data Series—                        data on
                                                    ^Provides quantitative           and chemical
                                                                                       the physical
properties of materials, compiled from the world's literature and critically evaluated. Developed under a
worldwide program coordinated by NIST under the authority of the National Standard Data Act (Public
Law 90-396). NOTE: The Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data (JPCRD) is published
bimonthly for NIST by the American Institute of Physics (AIP). Subscription orders and renewals are
available from AIP, RO. Box 503284, St. Louis,         MO
                                                    63150-3284.
                           —
Building Science Series Disseminates technical information developed at the Institute on building
materials, components, systems, and whole structures. The series presents research results, test methods, and
performance criteria related to the structural and environmental functions and the durability and safety
characteristics of building elements and systems.

Technical Notes   —   Studies or reports which are complete in themselves but restrictive in their treatment of
a subject. Analogous to monographs but not so comprehensive in scope or definitive in treatment of the
subject area. Often serve as a vehicle for final reports of work performed at NIST under the sponsorship of
other government agencies.
Voluntary Product Standards       —Developed under procedures published by             the Department of Commerce
in Part 10, Title 15, of the Code of Federal Regulations. The standards establish nationally recognized
requirements for products, and provide all concerned interests with a basis for common understanding of
the characteristics of the products. NIST administers this program in support of the efforts of private-sector
standardizing organizations.

Order the following NIST publications     —FIPS and NISTIRs—from the National Technical Information
Service, Springfield, VA 22161.

                                                                                 —
Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUB) Publications in this series
collectively constitute the Federal Information Processing Standards Register. The Register serves as the
official source of information in the Federal Government regarding standards issued by NIST pursuant to
the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended. Public Law 89-306 (79 Stat.
1127), and as implemented by Executive Order 11717 (38 FR 12315, dated May 11, 1973) and Part 6 of
Title 15   CFR (Code of Federal Regulations).
NIST Interagency or Internal Reports (NISTIR)            —  ^The series includes interim or final reports on work
performed by NIST for outside sponsors (both government and nongovernment). In general, initial
distribution is handled by the sponsor; public distribution is handled by sales through the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, VA 22161, in hard copy, electronic media, or microfiche form. NISTIR's
may also report results of NIST projects of transitory or limited interest, including those that will be
published subsequently in more comprehensive form.
u
u
a>
a
UIO   ard


U     pu
Cm    3
O
B  O
a>
s 3 60       ,     ,




            Ob   3 a-
4>    —
Q gO
  .



£5 Z i o         o £
