           Cybersecurity and
2020   Privacy Annual Report




               NIST SPECIAL PUBLICATION 800-214
                 2020 Cybersecurity and
                 Privacy Annual Report

              PATRICK O’REILLY, EDITOR                      KRISTINA RIGOPOULOS, EDITOR
               Computer Security Division                     Applied Cybersecurity Division
           Information Technology Laboratory                Information Technology Laboratory


                                             CO-EDITORS:
                                             Larry Feldman
                                               Greg Witte
                                       Huntington Ingalls Industries
                                       Annapolis Junction, Maryland




THIS PUBLICATION IS AVAILABLE FREE OF CHARGE FROM
https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-214



SEPTEMBER 2021




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
Gina M. Raimondo, Secretary

NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
James K. Olthoff, Performing the Non-Exclusive Functions and Duties of the Under Secretary of Commerce
for Standards and Technology & Director, National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                      Table of Contents
Foreword........................................................................................................................................................... 1
Focus Area 1: Cybersecurity Awareness and Education............................................................................ 2
Focus Area 2: Identity and Access Management......................................................................................... 4
Focus Area 3: Metrics and Measurement..................................................................................................... 7
Focus Area 4: Risk Management...................................................................................................................10
Focus Area 5: Privacy Engineering...............................................................................................................14
Focus Area 6: Emerging Technologies..........................................................................................................16
Focus Area 7: Cryptographic Standards and Validation............................................................................19
Focus Area 8: Trustworthy Networks...........................................................................................................23
Focus Area 9: Trustworthy Platforms...........................................................................................................27
ITL Leadership and Participation in National and International Standards Programs.........................30
Opportunities to Engage with the NIST Cybersecurity & Privacy Program..........................................31
Foreword
                   With each day bringing new cybersecurity and privacy challenges and
                   advances, it is little wonder that many leaders feel as if they have been cast
                   in the role of the Red Queen in Lewis Carroll’s “Through the Looking-Glass.” In
                   that classic, the Queen tells Alice: "Now, here, you see, it takes all the running
                   you can do to keep in the same place. If you want to get somewhere else, you
                   must run at least twice as fast as that!"
                   It is true that leaders need to be nimble and move quickly to avoid the
                   consequences of cybersecurity and privacy attacks that threaten
                   their enterprises. That need extends to government agencies, like NIST,
                   that are trying to help meet those urgent challenges.
 At NIST, we know that – in addition to current needs – we also have a responsibility to keep an
 eye on the horizon, anticipating technology changes, threat environments, and cultural shifts
 that could affect the ability of organizations to manage cybersecurity and privacy risks.
 We've successfully carried out our work for nearly 50 years precisely because we not only
 address near-term challenges but also spend time thinking, exploring, listening, and speaking
 with others about the really big issues in store for all of us. We tackle current issues, but we
 also play the long game – the infinite game, if you will. We are mindful of the reality that
 cybersecurity and privacy challenges are evolving. At NIST, we make it our business to help
 others be prepared by anticipating needs and creating opportunities. We anchor our decisions
 with our feet firmly planted in both the present and the future. As you read this report about our
 efforts and accomplishments in 2020, you will understand how we have been addressing both
 short-term and long-term needs.
 For example, in the cryptographic arena, we are not only providing and improving practical
 tools and services for today, we also are rapidly moving forward to ensure that Post-Quantum
 Cryptography standards are ready when quantum computing becomes a real threat to
 the protective algorithms that we all take for granted. We have been integrating privacy
 considerations into the basic control suites that so many organizations rely on now, and we are
 widening our privacy focus to encompass the broader privacy concerns that arise as mobile
 computing, e-commerce, and the Internet of Things advance. The intentional addition of the
 word “privacy” in this report’s title reflects changing technological capabilities and society’s
 expectations.
 This year’s annual report is grouped into nine priority areas for NIST, with most – but not all
 – of the work being conducted by our Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) and in close
 collaboration with the private and public sectors. While these represent areas that NIST believes
 merit the bulk of our attention for the foreseeable future, the report also includes other specific
 projects of importance that do not fit neatly into these buckets.
 All of this work adds up to cultivating trust in information, systems, and technologies. That’s
 our charge. That’s our reason for being. I encourage you to review our recent progress and to
 help us look well beyond the here-and-now of technology, cybersecurity, and privacy; this will
 enable all of us to meet the future with confidence that we can manage the emerging risks and
 change the world for the better for the next 50 years.

                                                                                       Kevin Stine
                                                                  NIST Chief Cybersecurity Advisor

 NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                         PAGE 1
1 | Cybersecurity Awareness and Education




                                                                                     Credit: Shutterstock




NIST continues to coordinate a National Cybersecurity Awareness and Education Program that
includes activities such as the widespread dissemination of cybersecurity technical standards
and best practices; efforts to make cybersecurity best practices usable by a variety of individuals
and stakeholders; increasing public awareness of cybersecurity, cyber safety, and cyber ethics;
increasing the understanding of the benefits of ensuring effective risk management of
information technology and the methods to mitigate and to remediate vulnerabilities;
supporting formal cybersecurity education programs at all levels to prepare and improve a
skilled cybersecurity workforce; and promoting initiatives to evaluate and forecast future
cybersecurity workforce needs of the Federal Government and develop strategies for
recruitment, training, and retention.
National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education
The National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) is a partnership among government,
academia, and the private sector. NICE is focused on cybersecurity education, training,
and workforce development. NIST's leadership of the program helps position it to
support the country’s ability to address current and future cybersecurity challenges through
standards and best practices.
NICE's mission is to energize and promote a robust network and ecosystem of
cybersecurity education, training, and workforce development. This mission supports the
vision of helping to secure the nation by increasing the number of skilled cybersecurity
professionals.


NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                           PAGE 2
In Fiscal Year (FY) 2020, the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education (NICE) finalized
two publications. The first, NIST Interagency or Internal Report (NISTIR) 8287, A Roadmap for
Successful Regional Alliances and Multistakeholder Partnerships to Build the Cybersecurity
Workforce, provides a summary of how to create ecosystems and partnerships to stimulate
cybersecurity education and workforce development.
The second, NIST Special Publication (SP) 1500-16, Improving Veteran Transitions to Civilian
Cybersecurity Roles: Workshop Report, presents the findings and recommendations from
a workshop on how to help transitioning military members discover opportunities in the
cybersecurity workforce.
NICE also curated a webpage for free and low-cost online cybersecurity learning content. At a
time when many are transitioning to remote learning or considering a job or career change, this
resource provided links to training courses, labs, and curriculum for the purposes of progressing
toward new skills or credentials in cybersecurity.
NICE hosted several events in FY 2020. In addition to monthly webinars, NICE held two annual
conferences – the NICE Conference and Expo in Phoenix, Arizona, which had more than
800 registrants; and the NICE K12 Cybersecurity Education Conference in Garden Grove,
California, which had more than 450 registrants. NICE also conducted a workshop on Use
Cases for the NICE Framework and the annual National Cybersecurity Career Awareness
Week where organizations from around the world held virtual and in-person events to
help inspire and promote awareness and exploration of cybersecurity careers.
Advancing Cybersecurity Usability
NIST has popularized the “Phish Scale” as a method to better characterize an organization’s
phishing risk. The scale considers phishing cues and user context to help Chief Information
Security Officers and phishing training implementers rate the difficulty of their organizations’
phishing exercises and explain associated click rates. NIST’s Video and Digital Media Production
Group created a video for the Phish Scale, and research results were published in the Journal of
Cybersecurity and highlighted in a NIST article that garnered media attention across industry,
government, and academia.
NIST also completed an in-depth interview study to understand consumers’ challenges,
perceptions, and experiences related to smart home security and privacy. The results of the
study inform the Internet of Things (IoT) security and privacy guidelines by identifying current
gaps in users’ experiences and suggesting how smart home devices might be designed to
better integrate usability, privacy, and security. The capstone paper describing the results will
be published in the proceedings of the 2021 USENIX Security Symposium.
Small Business Cybersecurity Corner
In FY 2020, the Small Business Cybersecurity Corner website organization and design were
updated based on the results of a usability study conducted by a set of small business owners.
In addition to facilitating access to many popular small business security resources, the
language of the site was updated to be more accessible and relatable to the small business
community. Training materials and accompanying resources continue to be expanded based
on cybersecurity resources and feedback received from NIST’s federal partners and the public.



NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                      PAGE 3
2 | Identity and Access Management




                                                       Credit: Shutterstock

Identity and Access Management (IdAM) is a fundamental and critical cybersecurity capability
to ensure that the right people have the appropriate access to the proper resources at the right
time. To advance the state of identity and access management, NIST:
• Conducts focused research to better understand new and emerging technologies,
  impacts on existing standards, and ways to implement IdAM solutions;
• Leads in the development of national and international IdAM standards, guidance,
  best practices, profiles, and frameworks to create an enhanced, interoperable suite of
  secure, privacy-enhancing solutions;
• Evolves its IdAM standards, guidelines, and resources; and
• Produces example solutions that bring together the IdAM requirements needed to
  address specific business cybersecurity challenges.
IdAM is an important component of cloud computing security, and NIST publishes access control
characteristics and general access control guidelines for various cloud service models. NIST also
performs research and development regarding access control rules and methods.

Personal Identity Verification (PIV)

As required by Homeland Security Presidential Directive 12, NIST developed and maintains
the Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) for personal identity verification (PIV) of
federal employees and contractors (FIPS 201). In FY 2019, NIST initiated a revision of FIPS 201
to incorporate changing business requirements of federal departments and agencies and to
adapt to an evolving technology environment. The revision also helps users to align with Office
of Management and Budget (OMB) Policy Memorandum M-19-17. Revision activities began in
FY 2019 with a business requirement meeting to engage with federal stakeholders about the
revision goals. In FY 2020, the PIV team updated the draft standard based on the revision goals

NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                      PAGE 4
and published public draft FIPS 201-3. The draft standard expands the set of PIV authenticators
beyond the current practices (including the current smart card form factor) while addressing
interagency use of new types of PIV authenticators (i.e., derived PIV credentials) via federation.
The revision also aims to facilitate the issuance of PIV cards by enabling remote identity proofing.
These changes closely align with M-19-17. For FY 2021, the PIV team will actively work on
resolving comments on the public draft while continuing outreach to federal stakeholders.

Digital Identity Guidelines
The four-volume set of NIST SP 800-63-3, Digital Identity Guidelines, was published in
June 2017. Following three years of federal agency experience implementing the controls
and requirements and to help stay ahead of potential online identity attacks, the Information
Technology Laboratory (ITL) decided to revise and update all volumes of SP 800-63-3.

NIST ITL published the pre-draft Request for Comments for the revision of SP 800-63-3 on
June 8, 2020. The Request for Comments identified nine topics for potential update.
Additionally, NIST ITL provided numerous virtual conferences and presentations on the
targeted topics for potential revision and other aspects of the Digital Identity Guidelines to
improve and focus the development and submission of comments. More than 40 federal
agencies and industry organizations responded with over 300 comments. ITL published a
public roadmap for key activities, milestones, and target dates for the development of SP
800-63, Revision 4, and published all comments received by the comment closing date. As
indicated in the roadmap, ITL plans to complete adjudication of comments received in the first
quarter of FY 2021 and will post issues for potential revision on GitHub in the second quarter.

Implementation Resources for NIST SP 800-63, Digital Identity Guidelines
In June 2020, NIST ITL published resources for applying NIST SP 800-63. Based on requests
from federal agencies and industry and on recommendations from the U.S. General
Accountability Office (GAO), NIST developed and published materials to provide non-
normative guidance for the implementation of SP 800-63A, Enrollment and Identity
Proo ing; SP 800-63B, Authentication and Lifecycle Management; and SP 800-63C,
Federation and Assertions. The guidance addresses key topics and aspects of each volume
to facilitate the understanding and implementation of the requirements for all assurance
levels. ITL presented information for federal agencies and industry to promote the use of the
implementation resources and discuss key topics, requirements, and controls and how to
properly implement them.

Conformance Criteria for NIST SP 800-63A and 800-63B
OMB Policy Memorandum M-19-17 updated federal identity, credentials, and access
management policy and provided direction for federal agencies to enhance
associated capabilities. The OMB Policy Memo assigned NIST the responsibility for developing
conformance criteria for accreditation of products and services to meet the designated levels
of assurance in SP 800-63-3. In response, NIST ITL developed the criteria for NIST SPs
800-63A and 800-63B.
NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                         PAGE 5
The conformance criteria present all normative requirements and controls of SP 800-63-3 by
designated assurance level, the control objectives for each criterion, recommended methods for
determining conformity, and supplemental guidance to assist implementers and assessors. The
criteria are intended for federal agencies and industry service providers for the implementation
of SP 800-63-3 and for conducting conformance and security assessments under the Federal
Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA). NIST provided virtual conferences and
presentations to explain how to apply and use the conformance criteria for implementation and
conformance assessment. Multiple federal agencies and industry organizations have developed
programs to incorporate the conformance criteria and take advantage of the guidance and
tools presented in the document.

Access Control System Guidance and Research for Cloud Systems
NIST developed SP 800-210, General Access Control Guide for Cloud Systems, to present
cloud access control characteristics and general access control guidance for cloud service
models: IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service), PaaS (Platform as a Service), and SaaS (Software
as a Service). The main focus is on the technical aspects of access control without considering
deployment models (e.g., public, private, hybrid clouds). It also focuses on trust and risk
management issues, which require different layers of discussions that depend on the security
requirements of the business function or the organization of deployment for which the cloud
system is implemented. NIST researched emerging technologies that can be applied to access
control mechanisms, such as the Natural Language Processing algorithm to automatically
generate access control policy from natural language documentation. Currently, studies of
experiment tools, user cases, and language features are the focus of the research work.

Access Control Policy Verification and Development Tools
Access control systems are among the most critical network security components. Faulty
policies, misconfiguration, or flaws in software implementation can result in serious
vulnerabilities. To address these issues, NIST developed and is improving the Access Control
Policy Tool (ACPT), which allows a user to compose, verify, test, and generate access control
policies. New user-interface features have been added to the improved version of ACPT. NIST
has also developed the Access Control Rule Logic Circuit (ACRLC) simulation technique, which
enables access control policy authors to detect a fault when the fault-causing access control
rule is added to the policy. This notification allows a fix to be implemented in real time before
adding other rules that further complicate the detecting effort.

In addition to software simulation, NIST worked on hardware implementation of ACRLC with
the University of Arkansas C omputer Science Department. The hardware version of ACRLC
enables the study of performance and real-world applications. NIST also researched theories
for applying quantum algorithms to limited access control systems (such as IoT devices). The
research results are presented in the paper Apply Quantum Search to the Safety C heck for
Mono Operational Attribute Based Protection Systems, which will be published in the
international C onference on Security, Privacy, and Anonymity in Computation,
Communication, and Storage.
NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                      PAGE 6
3 | Metrics and Measurement




                                                                                Credit: Shutterstock



Cybersecurity Metrics provide decision support, and they help to measure and
improve performance and accountability for cybersecurity activities. A mature metrics program
is content-rich, supports a broader range of stakeholders, and provides greater value to the
organization. More precise measurement data helps to focus on an actionable approach
to improving cybersecurity. To support this effort, NIST has embarked on various initiatives,
some of which are highlighted here. Initiatives include research in new technology areas,
risk management tools and guidance, and ways for organizations to mature the use of
cybersecurity metrics.
Measurements for Information Security
Every organization wants to gain maximum value and effect for its finite cybersecurity-related
investments. This includes managing risk to the enterprise and optimizing the potential
reward of cybersecurity policies, programs, and actions. Organizations frequently make
decisions by comparing scenarios of various projected costs with potential associated
benefits and risk reduction. Senior executives need accurate and quantitative methods to
portray and assess these factors, their effectiveness and efficiency, and their effect on risk
exposure. Providing reliable answers to these questions requires organizations to employ a
systematic approach to cybersecurity measurement that considers current knowledge limits.
NIST’s cybersecurity measurements program enables organizations to manage
cybersecurity risks. NIST is undertaking a focused program on cybersecurity measurements
to support the development and alignment of technical measures to determine the effect of
cybersecurity risks and responses on an organization’s objectives. The initiative involves
collaboration with the research, business, and government sectors.


NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                      PAGE 7
In FY 2020, NIST issued a request for public comments on NIST SP 800-55, Revision 1,
Performance Measurement Guide for Information Security. NIST also created a website to
aggregate guidelines, tools, research, and resources for improving the quality and utility of
information to support decision making.
Cyber Risk Analytics
This project promotes technical solutions that enable organizations to bridge new and existing
data sets to advance cyber risk analysis and enhance the ability to report trends. The goal is
to facilitate information sharing among risk owners about historical, current, and future cyber
risk conditions. NIST is leveraging past and present efforts such as using a data repository
for cyber incident analysis, predictive analytics and strategic analysis on threat coverage, and
prioritization and gap identification. In FY 2020, research involved developing a proof-of-concept
sandbox for a trusted and secure repository in which enterprise risk owners can anonymously
share, store, aggregate, and analyze cyber incident data. As such, initial efforts explore the
enabling of capabilities such as anonymization, provenance, data enrichment, and data quality.
NIST will continue to explore data analytics to improve the understanding of cybersecurity risks
and inform management practices.
Additional software assurance projects included:
• Software Assurance Metrics and Tool Evaluation (SAMATE) improves software assurance
  by developing methods to enable software tool evaluation, measure the effectiveness of
  tools and techniques, and identify gaps in tools and methods.
• The Bugs Framework (BF) provides precise definitions of software bugs and language-
  independent taxonomies for describing software vulnerabilities. In FY 2020, BF published
  models and definitions.
• Software Assurance Reference Dataset (SARD) is a large collection of programs that
  contain known software flaws. In FY 2020, NIST enhanced SARD with a large collection of
  test cases contributed by the National Security Agency's Center for Assured Software.
• Static Analysis Tool Exposition (SATE) advances research in static analysis tools to find
  security-relevant source code weaknesses. NIST provides reference test cases to software
  assessment product vendors, and those vendors return the results of their products’ analyses
  to NIST to help better understand how to identify and report software weaknesses.
Automated Combinatorial Testing
Automated Combinatorial Testing (ACT) research focused on the application of
combinatorial methods for assurance of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML)
systems. ACT developed a new method and tool for analyzing and explaining the decisions of
AI/ML algorithms, presented this research to U.S. Air Force and U.S. Army researchers, and
collaborated with Virginia Tech on autonomous systems assurance.




NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                       PAGE 8
Computer Forensic Tool Testing
Computer Forensic Tool Testing (CFTT) is supported by the NIST Special Programs Office
and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). In FY 2020, several key advances were
made to help address a critical need in the law enforcement community to ensure the
reliability of computer forensic tools. CFTT tested the attributes of numerous digital forensic
tools, and federated testing was developed to provide third parties with the ability to use the
NIST testing methodology in their own labs and produce standardized test reports. In FY
2020, NIST upgraded the core infrastructure and added 14 published reports.
Computer Forensic Reference Data Sets
Computer Forensic Reference Data Sets (CFReDS) is a repository of documented sets of
digital evidence. In FY 2020, the development of an improved portal began. The goal is for the
CFReDS website to be a centralized portal for the forensic community to find and share
datasets of interest. The Forensics Tool Catalog is a web-based, community-sourced catalog
of tools aided by a taxonomy.
National Software Reference Library
The National Software Reference Library (NSRL) collects software from various sources and
incorporates file profiles into a Reference Data Set (RDS) of information. The RDS can be used
by members of law enforcement, government, and industry to review computer files by
matching file profiles in the RDS. This helps alleviate the effort involved in determining which
files are important as evidence on computers or file systems seized as part of criminal
investigations. NSRL provides a research environment to promote the development of new
forensic techniques and other applications in computer science. In FY 2020, the NSRL
published four releases of software metadata and enlarged the collection to a combined total
of 798 million files.




NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                     PAGE 9
4 | Risk Management




                                                                                  Credit: Shutterstock

Throughout FY 2020, NIST has made significant progress in advancing methods and guidelines
for managing enterprise risk related to cybersecurity, systems engineering, and privacy. NIST is
leading a multi-year effort to produce a cohesive portfolio of complementary risk management
resources that can be used individually or together to help public and private organizations
better manage cybersecurity and privacy risk at all levels of the enterprise.
Risk management has been a fundamental driver for organizations for as long as there has
been information to protect. Today's proliferation of risk management resources, combined
with advances in technology, increasingly call for a collaborative approach to managing
discipline-specific risks within the enterprise. This includes the need to ensure that managers,
risk professionals, developers, and designers work together to implement secure engineering
practices. These practices will help to ensure more secure systems, including those managed
by external partners, and expanded risk management applications for an evolving range of
products.
Risk Management Framework Updates
The Risk Management Framework (RMF) is one of NIST’s most popular and widely used
products. Initially created for federal agencies, organizations around the globe use the RMF
because it provides a structured and flexible process for managing security and privacy risk.
In FY 2020, NIST published SP 800–53, Revision 5, Security and Privacy Controls for Information
Systems and Organizations, which is the first and only comprehensive catalog of information
security and privacy countermeasures that provide a foundation for protecting organizations,
systems, and the personal privacy of individuals. The update represents a multi-year effort that
supports a proactive and systematic approach to ensuring that critical systems, components, and


NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                        PAGE 10
services are sufficiently trustworthy and have the necessary resilience to support organizational
missions. To this end, NIST has supported public and private-sector outreach for
interested stakeholders, including hosting a virtual event with over 8,500 participants.
The most significant changes to SP 800-53, Revision 5, include:
• Making controls outcome-based
• Consolidating the control catalog to address information security, privacy, and supply chain
  risk management
• Adding state-of-the-practice controls to support cyber resiliency, secure systems design,
  security and privacy governance, and accountability
• Transferring control baselines, including the first federal privacy control baseline, and tailoring
  guidance to a separate publication, NIST SP 800-53B, Control Baselines for Information
  Systems and Organizations
Supporting the Implementation of the RMF and SP 800-53
NIST continues to develop publications that support the implementation of the RMF steps,
including Volume 4 in the NISTIR 8011 series, Automation Support for Security
Control Assessments: Software Vulnerability Management. NISTIR 8011, Volume 4,
addresses the automation of security control assessment, helping with the software
vulnerability management of security capabilities and facilitating the risk management of
defects that are present in software on the network.
NIST also published SP 800-137A, Assessing Information Security Continuous
Monitoring (ISCM) Programs: Developing an ISCM Program Assessment. NIST SP
800-137A details an approach for the development and evaluation of Information Security
Continuous Monitoring (ISCM) programs. An ISCM program assessment provides
organizational leadership with information about the effectiveness and completeness
of the organization’s continuous monitoring program, including the review of ISCM
strategies, policies, procedures, operations, and the analysis of continuous monitoring data.
Integration of Cybersecurity Risk Management into Enterprise Risk Management
The increasing frequency, creativity, and severity of cybersecurity attacks mean that
all enterprises should ensure that cybersecurity risk is receiving appropriate attention
within their enterprise risk management (ERM) programs. In FY 2020, NIST developed
NISTIR 8286, Integrating Cybersecurity and Enterprise Risk Management, to help
enterprise stakeholders improve and apply the use of cybersecurity risk management (CSRM)
information as an input to ERM processes. By doing so, enterprises and their component
organizations can better identify, assess, and manage cybersecurity risks in the context of
their broader mission and business objectives. The publication describes the use of risk
registers to document, aggregate, and communicate risk elements. Doing so ensures that
CSRM is an integral part of ERM, both taking its direction from ERM and informing it.




NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                          PAGE 11
Advancing the Application of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework
NIST has continued to foster the adoption and application of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework
Version 1.1 (the Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity). The NIST
Cybersecurity Framework website has been expanded to provide learning materials, success
stories, and other helpful resources. Notably, the team has made significant progress in
encouraging global use of the framework and interoperability with other cybersecurity models.
Progress includes translation of the framework into several additional languages, including
Arabic, Bulgarian, Japanese, Polish, Portuguese, and Spanish. NIST also continues to contribute
to international standards development efforts related to cybersecurity risk management
and the development of cybersecurity frameworks, including t he International Organization
for Standardization / International Electrotechnical Commission (ISO/IEC) Technical
Specification 27110:2021, Information technology, cybersecurity and privacy protection –
Cybersecurity framework development guidelines, which is expected to be published in 2021.
NIST will also discuss and share information on the Cybersecurity Framework in bilateral
and multilateral international dialogues.
A key example of such an application is the development of NISTIR 8323, Foundational
PNT Profile: Applying the Cybersecurity Framework for the Responsible Use of Positioning,
Navigation, and Timing (PNT) Services. This publication describes a flexible and voluntary
model (based on the Cybersecurity Framework Profile concept) that can be used as part of a
risk management program to help organizations manage risks to systems, networks, and assets
that use PNT services. The project was launched in support of Executive Order 13905 to help
manage risks to PNT signals and data, which are susceptible to disruptions and manipulations
that can be natural, manufactured, intentional, or unintentional. Because the Cybersecurity
Framework provides a common set of terms and methods for organizing and communicating
about risks, such Profiles help foster discussions regarding how to identify important elements,
protect against known risks, detect incidents efficiently, and respond and recover effectively in
support of critical mission objectives.
In FY 2020, NIST continued to develop the National Cybersecurity Online Informative References
(OLIR) Program, an effort to facilitate subject-matter experts in defining standardized reference
documents regarding the relationships between elements of their documents and elements of
other documents like the NIST Cybersecurity Framework, NIST Privacy Framework, and SP
800-53. While organizations have published written comparisons of various elements (e.g.,
between NIST SP 800-53 controls and the Cybersecurity Framework Subcategories) for
many years, the OLIR Program provides a standardized format for digitally expressing those
relationships. To support consistent usage, NIST developed NISTIR 8278A, National
Online Informative References (OLIR) Program: Submission Guidance for OLIR Developers.
The OLIR Program can incorporate any authoritative documents, from national and international
standards, guidelines, frameworks, and regulations to policies for individual organizations,
sectors, and jurisdictions. Cybersecurity document owners can use the OLIR Program as a
mechanism for communicating with owners and users of other cybersecurity documents.




NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                     PAGE 12
Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management
NIST continued work on the Cyber Supply Chain Risk Management (C-SCRM) program. C-SCRM
is the process of identifying, assessing, and responding to risks associated with the distributed
and interconnected nature of information, communications, and operational technology product
and service supply chains. C-SCRM is integrated into Systems Security Engineering (SSE) and
covers the entire system life cycle (including research and development, design, manufacturing,
acquisition, delivery, integration, operations and maintenance, and disposal) since supply chain
threats and vulnerabilities may (intentionally or unintentionally) compromise a technology
product or service at any stage.
C-SCRM work in FY 2020 included the following:
• NISTIR 8272, Impact Analysis Tool for Interdependent Cyber Supply Chain Risks,
  describes a prototype solution for filling the gap between an organization’s risk appetite
  and supply chain risk posture by providing a basic measurement of the potential impact
  of a cyber supply chain event. This tool does not represent a complete C-SCRM solution
  but is intended to be integrated into or used in concert with tools such as third-party
  management, enterprise resource planning, and supply chain management.
• The Federal Acquisition Security Council, which was created as a requirement of the
  U.S. Federal Acquisition Supply Chain Security Act of 2018, helps develop policies and
  processes for agencies to use when purchasing technology products. It recommends
  C-SCRM standards, guidelines, and practices that NIST should develop.
• The Initial Public Draft of NISTIR 8276, Key Practices in Cyber Supply Chain Risk
  Management: Observations from Industry, provides a high-level summary of practices
  deemed by subject matter experts to be foundational to an effective C-SCRM program. It
  is based on an analysis of interviews with companies over several years (leading to the
  development of 24 case studies), prior NIST research in C-SCRM, and several standards
  and industry best practices documents. This work builds on the Roadmap for Improving
  Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity, a companion document to the NIST Cybersecurity
  Framework. The NISTIR is based on an analysis of interviews with companies over several
  years (leading to the development of 24 case studies), prior NIST research in cyber supply
  chain risk management, and several standards and industry best practices documents.
• Since NIST SP 800-161, Supply Chain Risk Management Practices for Federal
  Information Systems and Organizations, was published in 2015, many aspects of the
  laws, regulations, tools, technologies, and practices that encompass the information,
  communications, and operational technology supply chain risk management (SCRM)
  ecosystem have changed. NIST has initiated an update of SP 800-161 to incorporate
  lessons learned over the past several years, updates to relevant NIST guidance, and
  evolving security and privacy priorities.
• A National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE) demonstration project identified
  methods by which organizations can verify that their purchased computing devices are
  genuine and have not been altered.




NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                      PAGE 13
5 | Privacy Engineering




                                                                                   Credit: Shutterstock

The Privacy Engineering Program (PEP) works to provide trusted, rigorous tools and resources
that support innovation and privacy. PEP facilitates dialogues among stakeholders about
privacy risk management and promotes an organizational shift away from checklist-based legal
compliance to improve privacy measures. The following activities reflect progress made in FY
2020 toward three strategic PEP objectives: advancing the development of privacy engineering
and risk management guidelines and resources, positioning NIST as a leader in privacy research,
and advancing the development and deployment of privacy-enhancing technologies.
Privacy as a programmatic area intersects with each of the other priority focus areas, making
coordination and ongoing engagement critical across a range of technical domains. To advance
its strategic objectives, PEP collaborates with other NIST programs including the NCCoE, the
Cryptography Group, the FISMA program, and the Cybersecurity for IoT program, as reflected in
activities throughout this report.
Privacy Framework
In January 2020, NIST released the NIST Privacy Framework: A Tool for Improving Privacy through
Enterprise Risk Management (Privacy Framework). The Privacy Framework is a voluntary tool
to help organizations identify and manage privacy risks. This helps them provide innovative
products and services while protecting individuals’ privacy. Since its release, organizations have
adopted the Privacy Framework to improve privacy programs, drive alignment and collaboration
with security programs, and more effectively communicate about privacy risk management and
resource allocation with their leadership.
To support organizations’ use of the Privacy Framework, NIST launched an online, community-
driven Privacy Framework Resource Repository for collecting and sharing crosswalks, common
Profiles, guidelines, and tools that now contains more than forty resources. NIST also published a

NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                          PAGE 14
companion roadmap to the Privacy Framework, highlighting priority areas that pose challenges
to organizations in achieving their privacy objectives. This document supports continued
collaboration between NIST and stakeholders from government, academia, and industry.
Workforce Advancement
As recognized in the Privacy Framework companion roadmap, stakeholders have signaled
that demand for a robust and effective privacy workforce is outpacing supply. To support the
development of a workforce capable of managing privacy risk and provide a common language
around roles, tasks, knowledge, and skills, NIST initiated the development of a privacy workforce
taxonomy aligned with the Privacy Framework and the NICE Workforce Framework. NIST
launched this effort by collecting stakeholder feedback during the International Association
of Privacy Professionals (IAPP) virtual event, “Help Wanted: Growing a Workforce Capable of
Managing Privacy Risk.” The working sessions were attended by participants representing a
broad spectrum of the public and private sectors, including consulting, consumer technology,
energy, financial, non-profit, transportation, law, manufacturing, academia, and standards
organizations. NIST will use the stakeholder feedback received at the workshop to inform the
development of sets of tasks, knowledge, and skill statements for a privacy workforce taxonomy.
Privacy Leadership
Through leadership positions in key privacy and security organizations, NIST helps drive
change and standardization of privacy considerations. NIST personnel co-chaired the
Interagency Working Group (IWG) for Privacy with the U.S. Networking and Information
Technology Research and Development (NITRD) Program, and served as the first privacy co-
chair of the Federal Computer Security Managers’ Forum (FCSM). Through these and many
other roles, NIST drives application standards for important risk management focus areas.
Differential Privacy
De-identification techniques can be useful to organizations in mitigating privacy risks. While
guidance, standards, practices, and tools are beginning to be developed in this area, more
work is needed to increase their market-readiness and assist organizations with
implementation. In FY 2020, NIST launched a series of blogs on differential privacy, covering the
basics, applicable use cases, and open-source tools available for implementation to leverage
the differential privacy contributions indexed in the Privacy Engineering Collaboration Space.
The series is designed to help business process owners and privacy program personnel
understand basic concepts about differential privacy and applicable use cases and to help
privacy engineers and IT professionals implement the tools. NIST’s longer-term goal is to
develop a guideline for deploying differential privacy, informed by feedback and engagement
generated by the series of blogs.
Leadership and Participation in Developing National and International Standards
During FY 2020, NIST actively engaged with international standards development
organizations to advance the development of risk-based standards to help organizations
protect individuals’ privacy. NIST participated in the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO) Project Committee 317, which focuses on developing ISO 31700,
Consumer protection: privacy by design for consumer goods and services; ISO/IEC 27557,
Organizational privacy risk management; and Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) P7002, Data Privacy Process. In FY 2021, NIST will continue supporting these efforts
with a longer-term goal of developing more technical privacy standards in the future.
NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                      PAGE 15
6 | Emerging Technologies




                                                                                    Credit: Shutterstock

NIST has maintained a long-standing commitment to advancing innovation and supporting
cybersecurity and privacy research in emerging technologies and priorities, such as AI, the
Internet of Things (IoT), and cloud-native applications based on microservices architecture.
NIST's dedicated technical staff, one-of-a-kind facilities, and trusted, objective, non-regulatory
role position it well to help the Nation and its partners advance in these promising areas.
Cybersecurity for the Internet of Things (IoT)
NIST’s Cybersecurity for IoT program supports the development and application of
standards, guidelines, and related tools to improve the cybersecurity of connected
devices and the environments in which they are deployed. By collaborating with stakeholders
across government, industry, international bodies, and academia, the program aims to
cultivate trust and foster an environment that enables innovation on a global scale.
Accomplishments in FY 2020 included development of the following publications:
• NISTIR 8259, Foundational Cybersecurity Activities for IoT Device Manufacturers,
  recommends six foundational cybersecurity activities that manufacturers can perform to
  produce more secure devices during the pre-market and post-market product phases. These
  activities also provide the technical means for customers to secure their own devices, thereby
  lessening the prevalence and severity of IoT device compromises.
• NISTIR 8259A, IoT Device Cybersecurity Capability Core Baseline, identifies a core baseline
  of technical cybersecurity capabilities for manufacturers to support the protection of an
  organization’s devices, data, systems, and ecosystems across a broad set of use cases.
• NIST posted an online catalog of device cybersecurity capabilities and supporting non-
  technical manufacturer capabilities that are needed for applying NIST SP 800-53 controls in
  the federal environment. The catalog takes advantage of GitHub’s “issues” feature to provide
  a highly accessible means for the community to provide feedback.

NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                          PAGE 16
• NISTIR 8267, Security Review of Consumer Home Internet of Things (IoT) Devices, reviewed
  a number of typical home consumer IoT devices to better understand common security
  architectures and the typical range of core baseline capabilities in consumer IoT devices.
The IoT program is committed to international engagement. The harmonization of market
requirements is critical to improving IoT device security. Cyberthreats do not stop at borders,
and market fragmentation does not help improve security. Through ongoing participation in
ISO/IEC working groups, NIST has supported the development of international standards that
promote security and privacy in IoT devices including:
• Provision of NISTIR 8259 as input to the first draft of ISO/IEC 27402 – Cybersecurity –
  IoT security and privacy – Device baseline requirements; NIST provided comments and
  participated in working meetings for subsequent drafts.
• Provision of comments and participation in working meetings for ISO/IEC 27400 –
  Cybersecurity – IoT security and privacy – Guidelines.
• Promotion of U.S. interests and strategies on IoT security through participation in the ad hoc
  working group on IoT Security Standardization.
The IoT program participated in bilateral and multilateral discussions with international
governments and industries to increase awareness and utilization of NIST IoT cybersecurity
resources. The IoT program engaged with a number of countries and partners across several
regions, including Canada, the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, Germany, Taiwan,
Japan, the European Commission, and others.
In addition to the publications listed above, the Cybersecurity for IoT program engaged the
global community in many ways, including blog posts, webinars, an RSA Conference event, a
virtual workshop around the development of a federal profile of the online catalog of capabilities,
and a virtual workshop on the risks associated with consumer home IoT devices.
Blockchain Security
Blockchains are tamper-evident and tamper-resistant digital ledgers that are implemented in
a distributed fashion (i.e., without a central repository) and usually without a central authority
(i.e., a bank, company, or government). At their basic level, they enable a community of users to
record transactions in a shared ledger within that community such that under normal operation
of the blockchain network, no transaction can be changed once published.
NIST continued its research and development in the use, application, standardization, and
interoperability of blockchains and the potential they bring to cultivating trust. In FY 2020, NIST
expanded publications and research in some of the following areas:
• NISTIR 8301, Blockchain Networks: Token Design and Management Overview
• The use of aggregating atomic clocks for time stamping
• NIST White Paper, On the Profitability of Selfish Mining Against Multiple Difficulty
  Adjustment Algorithms
• NIST White Paper, A Taxonomic Approach to Understanding Emerging Blockchain Identity
  Management Systems
• Conference Paper, Implementing a Protocol Native Managed Cryptocurrency


NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                        PAGE 17
Artificial Intelligence
NIST contributes to the research, standards, evaluation, and data required to advance the
development, use, and governance of trustworthy artificial intelligence (AI). NIST aims to
cultivate trust in the design, development, and use of AI technologies and systems by improving
measurement science, technology, standards, and related tools in ways that enhance economic
security and improve the quality of life.
AI and machine learning (ML) are already changing the ways in which society addresses
economic and national security challenges and opportunities, and these technologies must
be developed and used in a trustworthy and responsible manner. Characteristics that support
trustworthiness include accuracy, explainability, interpretability, reliability, privacy, robustness,
safety, security (resilience), and the mitigation of harmful bias. Principles such as transparency,
fairness, and accountability should be considered, especially during deployment and use.
Trustworthy data, standards, evaluation, validation, and verification are critical for the successful
deployment of new technologies for genomics, image and video processing, materials, natural
language processing, robotics, wireless spectrum monitoring, and more.
Delivering the needed measurements, standards, and other tools is a primary focus of NIST’s
portfolio of AI efforts. It is an area in which the agency has special responsibilities and expertise
and for which others often turn to NIST for guidance. The agency’s AI goals and activities are
prioritized and informed by its statutory mandates, White House directives, and the needs
expressed by U.S. industry, other federal agencies, and the global AI research community.
NIST's continued AI work is aligned with five broad goals:
    1. Conduct fundamental research to advance trustworthy AI technologies.
    2. Apply AI research and innovation across the NIST Laboratory Programs.
    3. Establish benchmarks and develop data and metrics to evaluate AI technologies.
    4. Lead and participate in the development of technical AI standards.
    5. Contribute to discussions and development of AI policies.
NIST will continue to collaborate with commercial, academic, and public-sector partners to
pursue these goals and collectively advance the security and trustworthiness of this important
and emerging technology.




NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                          PAGE 18
7 | Cryptographic Standards and Validation




                                                                                    Credit: Shutterstock




Network and data security are essential in today’s environment of increasingly open and
interconnected systems, networks, and mobile devices. Cryptographic standards, algorithms,
and methods for encryption, key establishment, and digital signatures provide a critical
foundation for mobile device conversations, secure e-commerce transactions, electronic lock
access, and much more. Cryptography is a continually evolving field that drives research and
innovation. The Data Encryption Standard (DES) was groundbreaking but would fall far short
of the levels of protection needed today. The accomplishments below demonstrate NIST’s
continued dedication to the role it has fulfilled for nearly 50 years – leading public and private
collaborations to foster continued improvement and reliability in cryptographic techniques and
technology.
Post-Quantum Cryptography
In recent years, there has been steady progress in building quantum computers – machines
that exploit quantum mechanical phenomena to solve problems that are difficult or intractable
for conventional computers. When the capacity to build large-scale quantum computers exists,
they will be able to break many of the public-key cryptosystems currently in use. This would
seriously compromise the confidentiality and integrity of digital communications on the
internet and elsewhere. The goal of post-quantum cryptography (PQC ) (also called
quantum-resistant or quantum-safe cryptography) is to develop cryptographic systems that
are secure against both quantum and classical computers and that can be deployed
without drastic changes to existing communication protocols and networks.




NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                          PAGE 19
The question of when a large-scale quantum computer will be built is a complicated one. In
the past, it was less clear that large quantum computers were a physical possibility, but many
scientists now believe it to be merely a significant engineering challenge. Some engineers even
predict that within the next 20 years, sufficiently large quantum computers will be built to break
essentially all public key schemes currently in use. Historically, it has taken decades to
deploy modern public-key cryptography infrastructures, so efforts to prepare information
security systems that are resistant to quantum computing must begin now.
Motivated by these considerations, NIST is in the process of selecting public-key (quantum-
resistant) cryptographic algorithms through a public, competition-like process. The intent is for
new public-key cryptography standards to specify one or more additional unclassified, publicly
disclosed digital signature, public-key encryption, and key-establishment algorithms that are
available worldwide and capable of protecting sensitive government information well into the
foreseeable future, including after the advent of quantum computers.
In FY 2020, based on public feedback and internal reviews of the candidates, NIST announced
the 15 algorithms that would move into the third round of analysis. NIST mathematicians
and computer scientists consider these algorithms to be the strongest candidates for
standardization. The list includes seven “finalists” for public-key encryption/key-establishment
and digital signature algorithms as well as eight “alternates,” which will likely need another
round of evaluation. (The complete list is available on the NIST website and is described in
NISTIR 8309, Status Report on the Second Round of the NIST Post-Quantum Cryptography
Standardization Process). At the conclusion of the third round, NIST will select some of the
finalists for standardization.
This accomplishment represents several years of intensive research and industry collaboration.
NIST appreciates all submitters and those providing comments during the evaluation process.
NIST will continue to work with the cryptographic community to analyze the performance of
these algorithms to understand how they will perform in the real world.
Lightweight Cryptography
Many elements of modern technology rely on cryptography to provide confidentiality and to
ensure the integrity of information being exchanged. While many of today’s cryptographic
methods are reliable, they require time and power that many devices (e.g., sensor networks,
healthcare products, distributed control systems, IoT, and cyber-physical systems) may not
have. The small and simple nature of the millions of electronic devices making up the IoT
renders them ill-equipped to process the current cryptographic algorithms. To address this
challenge, NIST has initiated a lightweight cryptography standardization process to
solicit, evaluate, and standardize lightweight cryptographic algorithms that are suitable for
use in constrained environments where the requirements and performance of the
currently approved NIST cryptographic algorithms are not acceptable. In FY 2019, NIST
published a call for algorithms to be considered for lightweight cryptographic standards. NIST
received 57 submissions, 56 of which were accepted for the first round of evaluation. After
four months of evaluation, 32 of the first-round candidates proceeded to the second round of
evaluation.
In FY 2020, NIST continued performing a technical review of the second-round
candidates. This review included the verification of third-party security analysis; software
benchmarking on microcontrollers, determining which candidates perform better than current
NIST standards; and investigating the constraints of a variety of use cases.
NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                       PAGE 20
In November 2019, NIST held the Third Lightweight Cryptography Workshop to discuss
the candidate algorithms, including their design strategies, implementations, performance,
cryptanalysis, and target applications. In addition, NIST organized a virtual workshop to take
place at the start of FY 2021 and continued public collaboration on lightweight cryptography at
academic conferences and meetings with industry and government representatives.
Transition to FIPS 140-3
NIST has continued to develop new tools and processes to support an ISO-based cryptographic
module testing program as a validation authority while supporting the existing validation
process. For more than a quarter of a century, NIST’s FIPS 140 publication series has been used
to coordinate requirements and standards of cryptographic modules for use by U.S. agencies.
In March 2019, the Secretary of Commerce approved FIPS 140-3, Security Requirements for
Cryptographic Modules. The update to FIPS 140 includes references to two existing international
standards: ISO/IEC 19790:2012, Information technology — Security techniques —
Security requirements for cryptographic modules; and ISO/IEC 24759:2017, Information
technology — Security techniques — Test requirements for cryptographic modules.
In support of this update, NIST developed a series of draft Special Publications (the SP 800-140x
“subseries”) for public comment. They directly support FIPS 140-3 and its associated program,
the Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP):
• Draft SP 800-140, FIPS 140-3 Derived Test Requirements (DTR)
• Draft SP 800-140A, CMVP Documentation Requirements
• Draft SP 800-140B, CMVP Security Policy Requirements
• Draft SP 800-140C, CMVP Approved Security Functions
• Draft SP 800-140D, CMVP Approved Sensitive Parameter Generation and Establishment
  Methods
• Draft SP 800-140E, CMVP Approved Authentication Mechanisms
• Draft SP 800-140F, CMVP Approved Non-Invasive Attack Mitigation Test Metrics
Table 1 describes the transition timeline for implementation of the new standard.
            Table 1: Timeline for Implementation of FIPS 140-3 Submissions
    Date                                       Activity
   Mar 2019   FIPS 140-3 Approved
   Sep 2019      FIPS 140-3 Effective Date
   Oct 2019      Drafts of SP 800-140x for public comment
   Mar 2020      Published SP 800-140x documents
                 Implementation Guidance updates
                 Tester competency exam updated
                 Updated CMVP Program Management Manual
   Sep 2020      CMVP accepts FIPS 140-3 submissions
   Sep 2021      CMVP stops accepting FIPS 140-2 submissions for new validation certificates
   Sep 2026      Remaining FIPS 140-2 certificates moved to the Historical List

NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                      PAGE 21
Cryptographic Programs and Laboratory Accreditation
Cryptographic Security Testing laboratories are key to assuring that government
systems protected by cryptography to meet the validation requirements. There are currently
20 laboratories around the world certified through the National Voluntary Laboratory
Accreditation Program (NVLAP). To better assess tester proficiency knowledge across all
laboratories, the Cryptographic Validation Program (CVP) Certification Exam was revamped
to update the older FIPS 140-2 exam and incorporate the 2019 FIPS 140-3 standard's
unique requirements.
Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP)
If the use of cryptography is needed for the protection of sensitive unclassified information,
federal agencies must use validated cryptographic modules. The Cryptographic Module
Validation Program (CMVP) was created to support the federal user community’s need
for strong, independently tested, and commercially available cryptographic modules. In FY
2020, the CMVP awarded 180 new validation certificates. In addition to working with
U.S. and Canadian agencies, NIST has begun incorporating standards from international
organizations that represent both public and private sectors within the cryptographic
community.
In order to remain effective, additional CMVP efforts included:
• Retooling automation to streamline the validation process and improve review consistency;
• Strengthening the relationship with the Cryptographic Module User Forum (CMUF)
  by collaborating on new and improved technical guidance and programmatic issues; the
  CMUF FIPS 140-3 working group contributed heavily to the development of training
  materials and implementation guidance for the new standard;
• Supporting the International Cryptographic Module Conference (ICMC) committee to build
  relationships with vendors and laboratories and participating in the 2020 ICMC conference;
• Hosting two virtual Lab Manager meetings to keep Cryptographic and Security Testing
  (CST) laboratories abreast of changes and developments; and
• Developing documents and processes to support the new FIPS 140-3 standard so that the
  CMVP can accept FIPS 140-3 submissions; the transition to the FIPS 140-3 standard
  continues as FIPS 140-2 begins to be phased out.
Cryptographic Algorithm Validation Program (CAVP)
The Cryptographic Algorithm Validation Program (CAVP) reached a milestone with the retirement
of the Cryptographic Algorithm Validation System (CAVS) test tool. CAVP now performs all
algorithm validations using the server-based Automated Cryptographic Validation Test System
(ACVTS), which implements the open standard Automated Cryptographic Validation
Protocol (ACVP). ACVTS effectively validates algorithm implementations and can make a
validation certificate publicly available in minutes. It also enables new testing techniques to be
explored and implemented.
At the 2020 RSA Conference, Researchers from NIST’s Security Testing, Validation
and Management (STVM) group presented a new test capable of detecting a denial-of-service
attack for hash functions and digital signature algorithms. STVM researchers have also
collaborated with industry researchers to generate high assurance cryptographic tests that
have been implemented on the ACVTS server.
NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                       PAGE 22
8 | Trustworthy Networks




                                                                                   Credit: Shutterstock


NIST works with industry to develop the measurement science and standards necessary to
ensure the robustness, scalability, and security of important infrastructures, including mobile
telecommunications networks and the global Internet. Research focuses on the measurement
and modeling techniques necessary to understand, predict, and control the behavior of Internet-
scale networked information systems. NIST staff use these insights to guide the design, analysis,
and standardization of new technologies aimed at improving the robustness and reliability of
the global communication infrastructure. Much of the research and industry collaboration occurs
at NIST’s National Cybersecurity Center of Excellence (NCCoE).

NIST’s Trustworthy Networks Program works with industry to resolve systemic vulnerabilities
in existing and emerging critical network infrastructures and to advance the development of
potentially disruptive technologies to improve the trustworthiness of future networks. NIST
collaborates directly with leading industry research (Internet Research Task Force), standards
(Internet Engineering Task Force), and network operations (North American Network Operators
Group) groups to promulgate NIST contributions and foster the design, standardization, and
commercial deployment of trustworthy communication infrastructures.

Major research areas and selected recent contributions within this program included:

• The Robust Interdomain Routing Project that works with Internet industry partners to improve
  the security and resilience of the Internet's global routing infrastructure. NIST SP 800-
  189, Resilient Interdomain Traffic Exchange: BGP Security and DDoS Mitigation, includes
  guidance on securing interdomain routing control traffic, preventing IP address spoofing,


NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                         PAGE 23
   and certain aspects of denial of service (DoS) and distributed DoS (DDos) detection and
   mitigation. Many of the recommendations in this publication focus on the Border Gateway
   Protocol (BGP). Technologies recommended in this document for securing the interdomain
   routing control traffic include Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI), BGP origin validation,
   and prefix filtering. Additionally, technologies recommended for mitigating DoS/DDoS attacks
   focus on preventing IP address spoofing using source address validation with access control
   lists and unicast reverse-path forwarding. Other technologies – such as remotely triggered
   black hole filtering, flow specification, and response rate limiting – are also recommended as
   part of the overall security mechanisms.

• SP 800-189 is referenced in NIST SP 800-53, Revision 5, as the technical basis for new
  boundary protection security controls (SC-7) that are focused on DDoS mitigation and the
  prevention of unauthorized control traffic. The guidance also fulfills a significant deliverable
  described in Executive Order 13800, Strengthening the Cybersecurity of Federal Networks
  and Critical Infrastructure.

Zero Trust Networks

Zero Trust is the term for a set of cybersecurity paradigms to move network defenses from
static, physical, network-based perimeters to software-defined security mechanisms based on
users, assets, and resources. A zero trust architecture (ZTA) uses zero trust principles to plan
enterprise infrastructure and workflows.

Zero trust assumes that there is no implicit trust granted to assets or user accounts based solely
on their physical or network location (i.e., a local corporate network versus the Internet). It is a
response to enterprise network trends, including remote users and cloud-based assets that are
not located within an enterprise-owned network boundary. Zero trust focuses on protecting
resources rather than network segments, as the network location is no longer considered the
prime component to the security posture of the resource.

NIST SP 800-207, Zero Trust Architecture, was published in August 2020 and discusses the core
principles and logical components that make up a ZTA. SP 800-207 contains a ZTA definition
and describes general deployment models and use cases where zero trust could improve an
enterprise’s overall information technology security posture. Following the publication of SP
800-207, the NCCoE initiated a new ZTA building block demonstration project that is planned
to start in FY 2021.

NIST’s Software Defined and Virtual Networks Project advances the state of the art in
network virtualization, network service function chaining, software-defined networks (SDN),
technologies, and techniques to address the robustness and security of virtualized network
services. Recent work explores novel applications of network function virtualization (NFV)
and SDN to practices such as network security and intrusion detection, cloud computing,
machine-to-machine communications, and advanced mobility. A key research component is the
development of programmable measurement techniques that efficiently operate at the scale
and speed of advanced networks.
NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                         PAGE 24
The Trustworthy Intelligent Networks project works with industry and academia to improve
the trustworthiness and applicability of artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML)
technologies in future networks and distributed systems. Research focuses on applications
of AI/ML to address security and robustness issues in today's networks and the development
of a means to test and measure the robustness of the AI/ML techniques necessary for future
autonomic networks.

5G Cybersecurity

The NCCoE announced a 5G Cybersecurity project in the Federal Register in May 2020.
The center has invited an impressive roster of technology providers and industry experts to
collaborate on its 5G Cybersecurity Project, including AMI, AT&T, CableLabs, Cisco, Dell, Intel,
Keysight, MiTAC, Nokia, Palo Alto Networks, and T-Mobile. These collaborators will work with
the NCCoE 5G team to identify 5G use case scenarios and demonstrate how components of
the 5G architecture can provide security capabilities to mitigate identified risks and comply with
industry sector requirements. The result will be a publicly available NIST Cybersecurity Practice
Guide in the Special Publication 1800 series, describing the practical steps needed to implement
a cybersecurity reference design.

Public Safety Communications Research

The Public Safety Communications Research (PSCR) Division serves as a technical advisor and
laboratory. PSCR is driven to advance communications technologies for public safety workers
by accelerating their development, adoption, and implementation so that the public safety
community can more effectively carry out their mission to protect lives and property.

Improving Wearable Device Cybersecurity for Public Safety

In partnership with PSCR, NIST finalized NISTIR 8196, Security Analysis of First Responder
Mobile and Wearable Devices, which helps consider various threats to and security objectives
for new types of products (e.g., smartphones, tablets, wearable devices) that have been made
available to public safety via the proliferation of the Nationwide Public Safety Broadband
Network (NPSBN). Its goals are to help public safety organizations make informed decisions
when selecting wearable technology and to better inform industry about cybersecurity concerns
of the public safety use case.

Innovations in Novel Technologies

NIST researchers designed and implemented a PSCR Prize Challenge – Making the Case:
Proactive Image Protection, one of ten challenges within the Tech to Protect Challenge. The
contest tasked participants with designing a system that could identify the provenance and
prove the authenticity of an image captured on a mobile device being used for public safety
purposes. NIST awarded prizes to four finalists whose solutions stand to build more confidence
in digital images gathered by public safety and law enforcement.



NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                       PAGE 25
Advancing Authentication Technology for Public Safety

The embrace of Long Term Evolution (LTE) mobile communications technology has led to critical
cybersecurity challenges for public safety, including authentication and identity management.
The mechanisms used in consumer devices do not sufficiently meet the public’s safety needs.

To stimulate innovation in authentication technology, researchers implemented an Open
Innovation Challenge: Expanding SIM Card Use for Public Safety. With the introduction of the
Nation’s first public safety-focused LTE network, this challenge asked the question, "Can public
safety leverage the universal integrated circuit card (UICC), a technology that is already integrated
into the LTE technology stack, to implement multi-factor authentication?" NIST awarded cash
prizes to three finalists who each demonstrated proof-of-concept solutions to this question.

PSCR, in partnership with NCCoE, identified critical technology areas that will likely influence
the public safety technology field in the near future. Over the past year, the team has worked
to produce several informative and guiding resources for stakeholders that describe technology
impacts, considerations, and best practices. These publications will lay a common groundwork
for the field before individual public safety agencies begin to implement security solutions in
identity federation, Identity as a Service (IDaaS), and biometric authentication. The PSCR/NCCoE
partnership has also awarded a grant to the Georgia Tech Research Institute (GTRI) to further
support their Trustmarks project, which seeks to build a system to support identity federation
and information sharing by establishing requirements and capabilities for identity providers.




NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                          PAGE 26
9 | Trustworthy Platforms




                                                                               Credit: Shutterstock


NIST defines a platform as a computer or hardware device or associated operating system, or
a virtual environment, on which software can be installed or run. The goal of the Trustworthy
Platforms focus area is to improve trust in the security and privacy of these systems and
infrastructures by providing guidance and technologies for the development and use of
secure platforms, including software, hardware, and firmware. The trustworthy platform is
a dynamic ecosystem that depends on multiple security and privacy technologies in order to
reliably deliver its services to the users. It is deployed and maintained in a measured state
that is known to protect the security and privacy of users and data, and it performs services
in a consistent and reliable manner. The desired outcome is to increase the adoption of
trustworthy platforms in order to improve trust in the security and privacy of systems and
infrastructures. NIST provides guidance and technologies for the development and use of
secure platforms and foundational components such as cryptography. NIST also helps to
develop quantifiable measurements that provide assurances for platform security, privacy,
and robustness.
Secure Software Development Framework
The software development life cycle (SDLC) is a methodology for designing, creating, and
maintaining software. Though there are many SDLC models, most do not explicitly address
software security.




NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                     PAGE 27
Secure software development practices should be integrated throughout SDLC models for three
reasons:
   1. To reduce the number of vulnerabilities in released software,
   2. To mitigate the potential impact of the exploitation of undetected or
      unaddressed vulnerabilities, and
   3. To address the root causes of vulnerabilities to prevent future recurrences.
In April 2020, NIST published the final version of a Cybersecurity White Paper on secure software
development practices, Mitigating the Risk of Software Vulnerabilities by Adopting a Secure
Software Development Framework (SSDF). The white paper recommends a core set of high-level
secure software development practices – called the Secure Software Development Framework
(SSDF) – to be added to each SDLC implementation. The SSDF practices are based on those
from established secure software development practice documents by other organizations.
The SSDF also provides a common vocabulary for secure software development that software
consumers can use to foster communications with software suppliers in acquisition processes
and other management activities.
Since NIST published the SSDF, there has been considerable interest from industry and others
in NIST in illustrating how the SSDF can be applied to particular SDLC models, especially
transitioning DevOps implementations to DevSecOps. NIST will continue to refresh and evolve
the SSDF in response to public feedback and the changing threats, vulnerabilities, practices,
and automation capabilities in software development.
Industrial Control System (ICS) Cybersecurity and Manufacturing Profile
A revision to NISTIR 8183, Cybersecurity Framework Manufacturing Profile, includes the
subcategory enhancements established in the NIST Framework for Improving Critical
Infrastructure Cybersecurity Version 1.1. These updates also include managing cybersecurity
within the supply chain, self-assessing cybersecurity risk, vulnerability disclosure, system
integrity, and more comprehensive controls for identity management.
The Manufacturing Profile was developed for manufacturers managing cybersecurity risk and is
aligned with manufacturing sector goals and industry best practices. It provides a voluntary, risk-
based approach for managing cybersecurity activities and reducing cyber risk to manufacturing
systems. The Manufacturing Profile is meant to enhance but not replace current cybersecurity
standards and industry guidelines that the manufacturer is embracing.
Systems Security Engineering
In FY 2020, NIST continued to foster the engineering-driven perspectives and actions necessary
to develop more defensible and survivable systems, including the machine, physical, and
human components of systems and the capabilities and services delivered by those systems.
The Systems Security Engineering (SSE) approach builds upon well-established international
standards for systems and software and fuses systems security engineering methods, practices,
and techniques. The initial volume in this new series, SP 800-160, Volume 2, Developing Cyber
Resilient Systems: A Systems Security Engineering Approach, describes an approach to
designing, building, and retrofitting engineered systems with the ability to anticipate, withstand,
recover from, and adapt to adverse conditions, stresses, attacks, or compromises on systems


NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                        PAGE 28
that use or are enabled by cyber resources. Volume 2 provides a handbook for achieving the
identified cyber resiliency outcomes based on a systems engineering perspective on system life
cycle and risk management processes. Organizations can select, adapt, and use some or all of
the cyber resiliency constructs and apply the constructs to the technical, operational, and threat
environments for which systems need to be engineered.
Smart Grid Cybersecurity
In FY 2020, engineers from NIST’s Engineering Laboratory and ITL expanded on the Cybersecurity
Framework Smart Grid Profile created during FY 2019 by developing a draft profile for the specific
capability of voltage regulation on the electric distribution system. The draft profile compares
and contrasts distribution system voltage regulation for both a high distributed energy resource
(DER) environment and a conventional grid environment and prioritizes NIST Cybersecurity
Framework subcategory outcomes based upon their ability to assist power system stakeholders
in achieving voltage regulation within these environments.
Working with a representative from the North American Electric Reliability Corporation (NERC),
NIST helped update the mapping between the NERC Critical Infrastructure Protection (CIP)
requirements and version 1.1 of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework. They also collaborated
with industry volunteers to help create a self-assessment tool for utilities to measure their
cybersecurity and compliance maturity and develop an improvement plan. NIST continues to
chair the Smart Electric Power Alliance (SEPA) cybersecurity working group and has established
an effort to determine threats to the power grid posed by customer energy Internet of Things
(IoT) devices (e.g., smart thermostats and water heaters) and provide suggested mitigations.
Methods for Securing Virtual Infrastructure
Microservices—an approach to software development using independent but interconnected
applications—simplify software scalability, usability, and availability. Because of these benefits,
this type of architecture is becoming commonplace for cloud-based and large
enterprise applications, but the characteristics of microservices-based applications
bring increased security challenges. The sheer number of microservices results in more
interconnections and more communication links to be protected. Additionally, the ephemeral
nature of microservices calls for secure service discovery mechanisms and the deployment
of security services that are not tightly coupled with application code. Given the
characteristics and associated security challenges, point security solutions (e.g.,
authentication, authorization, security monitoring) are inadequate.
In FY 2020, NIST published SP 800-204A, Building Secure Microservices-based Applications
Using Service Mesh Architecture. The publication provides deployment guidance for proxy-
based service mesh components as well as secure configuration recommendations that span
the entire application infrastructure space.




NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                        PAGE 29
ITL Leadership and Participation in National and
International Standards Programs
During FY 2020, NIST staff contributed to and held leadership positions in various
standards developing organizations (SDOs), including the Internet Engineering Task Force
(IETF), the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE), the World Wide Web
Consortium (W3C), and the ISO/IEC. Staff actively participated in standards bodies to
raise awareness and influence the development of privacy and cybersecurity standards,
including efforts within the ISO/IEC.
In FY 2020, NIST continued to engage with government and industry organizations to
demonstrate and ensure continued alignment with voluntary international standards. NIST
discussed the Cybersecurity Framework in numerous dialogues and has continued to
identify and promote international adaptations and translations of the Framework. NIST also
continues to contribute to international standards development efforts related to
cybersecurity risk management and the development of cybersecurity frameworks, including
ISO/IEC Technical Specification 27110.
The standards community is built upon international collaboration, and NIST leverages its
foundational and applied research efforts and experience in leadership to contribute to
the development of national and international standards. Today, these standards activities
span cybersecurity, privacy, cryptography, and critical fields, such as 5G mobile and cellular
technologies, quantum information, cloud, blockchain and distributed ledger technologies, and
the Internet of Things (IoT).
About 70 NIST staff members work with other agencies and industry leaders to develop
cybersecurity and privacy standards through voluntary consensus. NIST’s standards strategy
is captured in NISTIR 8074, Interagency Report on Strategic U.S. Government Engagement in
International Standardization to Achieve U.S. Objectives or Cybersecurity.
NIST has been instrumental in promoting and participating in the development of a family of
voluntary ISO/IEC standards that align with NIST’s cryptographic module validation standard
and related specifications. NIST served as the project editor for nine of those standards. NIST
uses collaborative opportunities to highlight the role that standards play in enabling technological
innovation and interoperability among products and systems. International collaboration and
alignment on standards-based approaches to cybersecurity and privacy risk management lead
to greater innovation and a more effective and efficient utilization of resources.
NIST also shares information on standards processes, the importance of standards on the
economy and facilitating international trade, and the ability of standards to help secure systems
and infrastructure. NIST coordinates with interagency partners on strategic approaches and
communication on standards for the U.S. Government.
In FY 2021, NIST staff will continue to lead and participate in cybersecurity and privacy
standardization efforts with an increased focus on new and emerging areas, such as AI,
quantum information, 5G communications, and zero trust architectures.




NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                         PAGE 30
Opportunities to Engage with the NIST
Cybersecurity & Privacy Program
Stakeholders are an important force behind NIST’s cybersecurity and privacy programs. NIST
counts on developers, providers, and everyday users of cybersecurity and privacy technologies
and information to guide priorities in serving the public and private sectors. Stakeholders are also
vital when it comes to decisions about the best methods and formats for delivering information
and services.
NIST engages in many ways, both formal and informal. NIST participates in various forums,
Communities of Interest (COI), joint research efforts, standards development organizations,
Guest researcher projects, student programs, and other partnership opportunities that are
available; hosts/sponsors various cybersecurity and privacy events; and gathers public feedback
on NIST publications, blogs, and social media.
Further details on engaging with NIST on Cybersecurity and Privacy are available
at https://www.nist.gov/cybersecurity/cybersecurity-privacy-stakeholder-engagement.
Funding Opportunities at NIST
NIST funds industrial and academic research in several ways. The Small Business Innovation
Research Program funds research and development (R&D) proposals from small businesses.
NIST offers grants to encourage work in the fields of precision measurement, fire research, and
materials science. Grants and awards supporting research by industry, academia, and other
institutions are also available on a competitive basis through various Institute offices.
For general information on the NIST grants programs, please contact Mr. Christopher Hunton
at (301) 975-5718 or by email at grants@nist.gov.




NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                       PAGE 31
                                        AUTHORITY
   This publication has been developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology
   (NIST) in accordance with its statutory responsibilities under the Federal Information
   Security Modernization Act (FISMA of 2014, 44 U.S.C. § 3541. Public Law (P.L. 113-283.
   NIST is responsible for developing information security standards and guidelines, including
   minimum requirements for federal information systems, but such standards and guidelines
   shall not apply to national security systems without the express approval of appropriate
   federal officials exercising policy authority over such systems. This guideline is consistent
   with the requirements of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB Circular A-130.

   Nothing in this publication should be taken to contradict the standards and guidelines made
   mandatory and binding on federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under statutory
   authority. Nor should these guidelines be interpreted as altering or superseding the existing
   authorities of the Secretary of Commerce, Director of the OMB, or any other federal official.
   This publication may be used by nongovernmental organizations on a voluntary basis and
   is not subject to copyright in the United States. Attribution would be appreciated by NIST.
              National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-214
              Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 800-214, 37 pages (September 2021)
                                          CODEN: NSPUE2

      This publication is available free of charge from https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-214

                                          DISCLAIMER
     Any mention of commercial products or organizations is for informational purposes only;
      it is not intended to imply recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of
       Standards and Technology, nor is it intended to imply that the products identified are
                             necessarily the best available for the purpose.

                                   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
   The editors would like to thank their NIST colleagues who provided write-ups on their project
   highlights and accomplishments for this annual report. They appreciate the work of Elaine
   Barker, Lisa Carnahan, Neal Gammons, Sara Kerman, Jeff Marron, Sheryl Taylor, and
   Isabel Van Wyk for reviewing and providing valuable feedback for this annual report.

                               TRADEMARK INFORMATION
   All names are trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners.




NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                        PAGE 32
       BACKGROUND INFORMATION OF ANNUAL REPORT

  This Annual Report provides the opportunity to describe the many cybersecurity program
  highlights and accomplishments from throughout the NIST Information Technology
  Laboratory (ITL). The report is organized into several focus areas that highlight key
  research topics and highlights.

  Please note: This Annual Report covers the Federal Government’s Fiscal Year (FY) 2020,
  from October 1, 2019 to September 30, 2020.

  ITL, an operating unit under NIST, contains seven divisions. Cybersecurity work is
  conducted by each division, and it is the sole focus of the Applied Cybersecurity and
  Computer Security Divisions. Throughout this Annual Report, there are references to
  particular division activities and often to work by groups within those divisions.

             REPORTS ON COMPUTER SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY
  The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at NIST promotes the U.S. economy and
  public welfare by providing technical leadership for the Nation’s measurement and
  standards infrastructure. ITL develops tests, test methods, reference data, proof of concept
  implementations, and technical analyses to advance the development and productive use
  of information technology. ITL’s responsibilities include the development of management,
  administrative, technical, and physical standards and guidelines for the cost-effective
  security and privacy of other than national security-related information in federal information
  systems. The Special Publication 800-series reports on ITL’s research, guidelines, and
  outreach efforts in information system security, and its collaborative activities with industry,
  government, and academic organizations.




NIST CYBERSECURITY & PRIVACY ANNUAL REPORT - FY2020                                         PAGE 33
