                       Archived NIST Technical Series Publication
The attached publication has been archived (withdrawn), and is provided solely for historical purposes.
It may have been superseded by another publication (indicated below).

Archived Publication
Series/Number:             NIST Special Publication 800-27
Title:
                           Engineering Principles for Information Technology Security (A
                           Baseline for Achieving Security)
Publication Date(s):       June 2001
Withdrawal Date:           June 2004
Withdrawal Note:
                           SP 800-27 is superseded in its entirety by the publication of
                           SP 800-27 Revision A (June 2004).


Superseding Publication(s)
The attached publication has been superseded by the following publication(s):

Series/Number:           NIST Special Publication 800-27 Revision A
Title:
                         Engineering Principles for Information Technology Security (A
                         Baseline for Achieving Security), Revision A
Author(s):
                         Gary Stoneburner, Clark Hayden, Alexis Feringa

Publication Date(s):     June 2004
URL/DOI:                 http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-27ra

Additional Information (if applicable)
Contact:                 Computer Security Division (Information Technology Lab)
Latest revision of the
                         SP 800-27 Revision A (as of June 19, 2015)
attached publication:
Related information:
                         http://csrc.nist.gov/

Withdrawal
                         N/A
announcement (link):




Date updated: June ϭ9, 2015
NAT L   INST. OF   STAND & TECH




AlllDt. DSBIMD
           NIST Special Publication 800-27   Engineering Principles for
                                             Information Technology Security
                                             (A Baseline for Achieving Security)
           Nisr
           National Institute of Standards   Recommendations of the
           and Technology
                                             National Institute of Standards and Technology
           Technology Administration
           U.S. Department of Commerce
                                             Gary Stoneburner, Clark Hayden, and Alexis Feringa




                          COMPUTER                                      SECURITY
rhe          National Institute of Standards and Technology was established in 1988 by Congress to "assist industry in
         the development of technology             .   .   .   needed to improve product quality, to modernize manufacturing processes,
to ensure product reliability     .   .   .   and to facilitate rapid commercialization ... of products based on new scientific
discoveries."
        NIST, originally founded as the National Bureau of Standards in 1901, works to strengthen U.S. industry's
competitiveness; advance science and engineering; and improve public health, safety, and the environment. One
of the agency's basic functions is to develop, maintain, and retain custody of the national standards of
measurement, and provide the means and methods for comparing standards used in science, engineering,
manufacturing, commerce, industry, and education with the standards adopted or recognized by the Federal
Government.
        As an agency of the U.S. Commerce Department's Technology Administration, NIST conducts basic and
applied research in the physical sciences and engineering, and develops measurement techniques, test
methods, standards, and related services. The Institute does generic and precompetitive work on new and
advanced technologies. NIST's research facilities are located at Gaithersburg,                          MD 20899, and at Boulder, CO 80303.
Major technical operating units and their principal activities are listed below. For more information contact the
Publications and Program Inquiries Desk, 301-975-3058.


Office of the Director                                                             Chemical Science and Technology
•   National Quality Program                                                       Laboratory
•   International and Academic Affairs                                             •   Biotechnology
                                                                                   •   Physical and Chemical Properties^
Technology Services                                                                •   Analytical Chemistry
•   Standards Services                                                             •   Process Measurements
•   Technology Partnerships                                                        •   Surface and Microanalysis Science
•   Measurement Services
•   Information Services                                                           Physics Laboratory
                                                                                   •   Electron and Optical Physics

Advanced Technology Program                                                        •   Atomic Physics
•   Economic Assessment                                                            •   Optical Technology

•   Information Technology and Applications
                                                                                   •   Ionizing Radiation

•   Chemistry and Life Sciences
                                                                                   • Time and Frequency'
                                                                                   • Quantum Physics'
•   Materials and Manufacturing Technology
•   Electronics and Photonics Technology
                                                                                   Manufacturing Engineering
                                                                                   Laboratory
Manufacturing Extension Partnership                                                •   Precision Engineering
Program                                                                            •   Manufacturing Metrology
•   Regional Programs
                                                                                   •   Intelligent Systems
•   National Programs
                                                                                   •   Fabrication Technology
•   Program Development
                                                                                   •   Manufacturing Systems Integration

Electronics and Electrical Engineering                                             Building and Fire Research
Laboratory                                                                         Laboratory
•   Microelectronics                                                               •   Applied Economics
•   Law Enforcement Standards                                                      •   Structures
•   Electricity                                                                    •   Building Materials
•   Semiconductor Electronics                                                      •   Building Environment
•   Radio-Frequency Technology'                                                    •   Fire Safety Engineering
•   Electromagnetic Technology'                                                    •   Fire Science
•   Optoelectronics'
                                                                                   Information Technology Laboratory
Materials Science and Engineering                                                  •   Mathematical and Computational Sciences^
Laboratory                                                                         •   Advanced Network Technologies
•   Intelligent Processing of Materials                                            •   Computer Security
•   Ceramics                                                                       •   Information Access
•   Materials Reliability'                                                         •   Convergent Information Systems
•   Polymers                                                                       •   Information Services and Computing
•   Metallurgy                                                                     •   Software Diagnostics and Conformance Testing
•   NIST Center for Neutron Research                                               •   Statistical Engineering



'At Boulder, CO 80303.
^Some elements at Boulder, CO.
NisT Special Publication 800 27   Engineering Principles for
                                  Information Technology Security
                                  (A Baseline for Achieving Security)

                                  Recommendations of the
                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology



                                  Gary Stoneburner,' Clark Hayden,^ and Alexis Feringa^




        COMPUTER                                          SECURITY
                                  'Computer Security Division
                                  Information Technology Laboratory
                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                  Gaithersburg,   MD  20899-8930

                                  ^Booz-Allen and Hamilton




                                  June 2001




                                  U.S. Department of Commerce
                                  Donald L. Evans, Secretary
                                  Technology Administration
                                  Karen H. Brown, Acting Under Secretary of Commerce for Technology

                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                  Karen H. Brown, Acting Director
                                Reports on Information Security Technology

    The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical leadership for the Nation's measurement and
standards infrastructure for information technology. ITL develops tests, test methods, reference data, proof of concept
implementations and technical analyses to advance the development and productive use of information technology.
ITL's responsibilities include the development of technical, physical, administrative, and management standards and
guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive unclassified information in federal computer systems.
This Special Publication 800 series reports on ITL's research, guidance, and outreach efforts in computer security, and
its   collaborative activities with industry, government, and academic organizations.




             National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-27
                Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 800-27, 30 pages (June 2001)
                                                 CODEN: NSPUE2




                                 U.S.   GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                               WASHINGTON: 2001

                    For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
                    Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov  — Phone: (202) 5 1 2- 1 800 —
                                                                             Fax: (202) 5 1 2-2250
                                     Mail Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-0001
                                     Table of Contents


1.0     Introduction                                                                        1

  1.1     Authority                                                                         1

  1.2     Purpose                                                                           1

  1.3     Scope                                                                             2
  1.4     Audience                                                                          2
  1.5     Document Structure                                                                2

2.0     Background                                                                          3
  2.1     Generally Accepted Principles and Practices for Securing Information Technolosv
  Systems (SP 800-14)                                                                       3
  2.2     Common Criteria                                                                   4
  2.3     Defense-in-Depth                                                                  4

3.0     Security Principles                                                                 5
  3.1     Introduction                                                                      5
  3.2     System Life-cycle Description                                                     6
  3.3     IT Security Principles                                                            6
  3.4    Principle/Life-cycle Summary                                                   19

4.0     SUMMARY                                                                         21

Appendix A-IT Specialist positions                                                     A-1

Appendix B-Definitions                                                                 B-1

Appendix C - References                                                                C-1
1.0      Introduction

1.1     Authority


This document has been developed by NIST in furtherance of its statutory responsibihties (under
the Computer Security Act of 1987 and the Information Technology Management Reform Act of
1996, specifically 15 U.S.C. 278 g-3(a)(5)). This is not a guideline within the meaning of (15
U.S.C. 278 g-3 (a)(3)).


These guidelines are for use by Federal organizations which process sensitive information/
They are consistent with the requirements of 0MB Circular A- 130, Appendix IH.

The guidelines herein are not mandatory and binding standards. This document may be used by
non-governmental organizations on a voluntary basis.              It is not subject to copyright.




Nothing in this document should be taken to contradict standards and guidelines made mandatory
and binding upon Federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under his statutory authority.
Nor should these guidelines be interpreted as altering or superseding the existing authorities of
the Secretary of Commerce, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, or any other
Federal official.


1.2     Purpose

                                                                Principle n. - A rule or standard,
The purpose of the Engineering Principles for
                                                                especially of good behavior.
Information Technology (IT) Security (EP-ITS)
is to present a list of system-level security                            American Heritage Dictionary
principles to be considered in the design,
development, and operation of an information system.


Ideally, the principles presented here would be used from the onset of a program                  —   at the

beginning of, or during the design phase        —and then employed throughout             the system's life-cycle.
However, these principles are also helpful in affirming and confirming the security posture of
already deployed information systems. The principles are short and concise and can be used by
organizations to develop their system life-cycle policies.




'
 Many people think that sensitive information only requires protection from unauthorized disclosure. However, the
Computer Security Act provides a much broader definition of the term "sensitive information:" any information, the
loss,misuse, or unauthorized access to or modification of which could adversely affect the national interest or the
conduct offederal programs, or the privacy to which individuals are entitled under section 552a of title 5, United
States Code (the Privacy Act), but which has not been specifically authorized under criteria established by an
Executive Order or an Act of Congress to be kept secret in the interest of national defense or foreign policy.




SP 800-27                                              Page 1                                                    3/21/01
1.3        Scope

This document is published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) as
recommended guidance for Federal departments and agencies and is intended to be used by both
the government and the private sector.


This document should be used by those interested in IT security and is applicable to all IT
systems, including general support systems and major applications.


This document presents generic principles that apply to all systems. It is anticipated that the
application of these generic principles to specific technology areas will be accomplished by use
of this document in developing more detailed guidance.


1.4        Audience

The principles presented herein can be used by:

          Users when developing and evaluating functional requirements, or when operating
          information systems within their organizations.


          System Engineers and Architects when designing, implementing, or modifying an
          information system.


          IT Specialists during all phases of the system life-cycle.

          Program Managers and Information System Security Officers (ISSO) to ensure
          adequate security measures have been considered for all phases of the system life-cycle.


1.5        Document Structure

Section 1 of this document provided the purpose and scope, and clarified the intended audience.
Section 2 provides background information, including how this document is related to other
NIST, Federal, and international documents and initiatives including Generally Accepted
Principles and Practices for Securing Information Technology Systems, SP 800-14, September
1996, and the Common Criteria. Section 3, the main section of this document, presents 32
security principles and identifies their applicability in the life-cycle phases. Section 4 is a short
summary. This document also has three appendices; Appendix A provides background on the
new 0PM IT specialist sub-categories. It also contains a table that identifies when in the system
life-cycle they might be most involved with security.            Appendix B defines terms used in this
document and Appendix C provides a list of referenced documents.



^   IT Specialist is a new occupation title created by the Office of Personnel Management (0PM) under the
Information Technology Management series. Within this occupation     0PM has identified several specialty areas
referred to as "parenthetical titles." In this document we use the generic term throughout but have provided
additional detail in Appendix A.




SP 800-27                                               Page 2                                                 3/21/01
2.0      Background

Private businesses and government agencies, both foreign and domestic, are becoming
increasingly reliant on information technology to fulfill many basic functions. Businesses are
making changes simply to remain competitive in the changing global marketplace. Likewise,
government agencies are seeking to provide better service to their citizens.

Regardless of the reason, the move to a digital economy has caused information and information
technology to become valuable business assets that need to be protected. With this development
has come the recognition that fulfilling these basic functions requires as a matter of course
comprehensive, well-designed, and reliable information system security programs.


Information system security program standards, guidance, and implementation strategies have
been, or are being, developed by public and private sector organizations in the United States and
abroad. These wide-ranging efforts are designed to address many aspects of information security
at many levels of detail. They address specific topics such as public key infrastructure (PKI) and
certification and accreditation (C&A) processes, and more general topics such as organizational
best practices.


Seeking to support and guide these many efforts, several private and public organizations have
developed a number of explicit and implicit information system security principles. These
security principles, in turn, have the potential to become an extensive canon for users, designers,
and engineers to consider in designing information system security programs.


This document seeks to compile and present many of these security principles into one, easy-to-
use document for those concerned with information system security. In contrast to other
organization-level efforts, the principles presented in this document are structured around a
system-level, engineering approach.


2.1      Generally Accepted Principles and Practices for Securing Information Technology
Systems (SP 800-14)


SP 800-14 provides a foundation upon which organizations can establish and review information
technology security programs. The eight Generally Accepted System Security Principles in SP
800-14 are designed to provide the public or private sector audience with an organization-level
perspective when creating new systems, practices, or policies.


While derived primarily from concepts found in the eight principles and 14 practices identified in
the SP 800-14, the EP-ITS principles provide a system-level (versus organizational-level)
perspective for information technology security.


It should   be noted the EP-ITS principles are not ordered under the same headings used in SP 800-
14.   This is due to the different focus for the two documents and is akin to the loose relationship
between principles and practices that exists in SP 800-14.




SP 800-27                                       Page 3                                          3/21/01
2.2     Common Criteria

The Common Criteria (CC) is a repeatable methodology for documenting FT security
requirements, documenting and vahdating product security capabilities, and promoting
international cooperation in the area of IT security.


Use of Common Criteria "protection profiles" and "security targets" greatly aids the development
of products or systems that have IT security functions. The rigor and repeatability of the
Common Criteria methodology provides for thorough definition of user security needs.
Validated security targets provide system integrators with key information needed in the
procurement of security components and implementation of secure IT.       The approach of this
document meshes with the Common Criteria methodology.

2.3    Defense-in-Depth


Securing information and systems against the full spectrum of threats requires the use of
multiple, overlapping protection approaches addressing the people, technology, and operational
aspects of information technology. This is due to the highly interactive nature of the various
systems and networks, and the fact that any single system cannot be adequately secured unless all
interconnecting systems are also secured.


By using multiple, overlapping protection approaches, the failure or circumvention of any
individual protection approach will not leave the system unprotected.   Through user training and
awareness, well-crafted policies and procedures, and redundancy of protection mechanisms,
layered protections enables effective protection of information technology for the purpose of
achieving mission objectives.


For example, this fundamental need for layered protections is captured in the "Defense-in-Depth"
strategy being used by   DoD for protecting information systems, both classified and unclassified,
and is described in Department of Defense Global Information Grid Information Assurance
(GIG, http://www.c3i.osd.mil/org/cio/doc/gigia061600.pdf). Additionally, a source of
information on implementing layered protections is the Information Assurance Technical
Framework (lATF, http://www.iatf.net/ ). The lATF advocates the use of multiple information
technology protection methods or approaches following the DoD "Defense-in-Depth" strategy to
establish a composite security posture adequate to blunt threats.


Federal agencies may find the GIG and lATF to be useful sources of information.




SP 800-27                                       Page 4                                       3/21/01
3.0     Security Principles

3.1    Introduction


To aid in designing a secure information system, NIST compiled a set of engineering principles
for system security.   These principles provide a foundation upon which a more consistent and
structured approach to the design, development, and implementation of IT security capabilities
can be constructed.


While the primary focus of these principles is the implementation of technical controls, these
principles highlight the fact that, to be effective, a system security design should also consider
non-technical issues, such as policy, operational procedures, and user education.


The principles described here do not apply to all systems at all times. Yet each principle should
be carefully considered throughout the life-cycle of every system. Moreover, because of the
constantly changing information system security environment, the principles identified are not
considered to be an inclusive list. Instead, this document is an attempt to present in a logical
fashion fundamental security principles that can be used in today's operational environments.          As
technology improves and security techniques are refined, additions, deletions, and refinement of
these security principles will be required.


Each principle has two components. The first is a table that indicates where the principle should
be applied during the system life-cycle. The second is an explanatory narrative further
amplifying the principle.


The five life-cycle planning phases used are defined in the Generally Accepted Principles and
Practices for Securing Information Technology Systems, SP 800-14:


       Initiation Phase
       Development/ Acquisition Phase
       Implementation Phase
       Operation/Maintenance Phase
       Disposal Phase.


In an effort to associate each principle with the relevant life-cycle planning phase(s), a table
similar to the example table below. Table 3-1, has been developed for each principle.        The table
identifies each life-cycle phase, and "check marks" are used to indicate if the principle should be
considered or applied during the specified phase.
used to support the life-cycle phase, and two checks
                                                     One check
                                                          '
                                                                 '
                                                                     V   signifies the principle can be
                                                              signifies the principle is key to
successful completion of the life-cycle phase.




SP 800-27                                        Page 5                                            3/21/01
                             Table 3-1 Example Life-cycle Applicability Table

                                 Initiation   Devel/Acquis    Implement      Oper/Maint         Disposal

        Applicability



For example, the table above indicates that Principle No. X must be considered and is key to the
successful completion of the Initiation phase. Additionally, Principle No. X, should be
considered and applied in support of the Development/ Acquisition and the
Operation/Maintenance phases.


3.2       System Life-Cycle Description

The following brief descriptions of each of the five phases of the system life-cycle are taken from
Generally Accepted Principles and Practices for Securing Information Technology Systems, SP
800-14.

      Initiation: During the initiation phase, the need for a system is expressed and the purpose of
      the system is documented. Activities include conducting a sensitivity assessment.

      Development/Acquisition: During this phase, the system is designed, purchased,
      programmed, developed, or otherwise constructed. This phase often consists of other defined
      cycles, such as the system development cycle or the acquisition cycle. Activities include
      determining security requirements, incorporating security requirements into specifications,
      and obtaining the system.

      Implementation: During implementation, the system is tested and installed or fielded.
      Activities include installing/turning on controls, security testing, and accreditation.

      Operation/Maintenance: During this phase, the system performs its work. The system is
      almost always being continuously modified by the addition of hardware and software and by
      numerous other events. Activities include security operations and administration, operational
      assurance, and audits and monitoring.

      Disposal: The disposal phase of the IT system life-cycle involves the disposition of
      information, hardware, and software. Activities include moving, archiving, discarding or
      destroying information and sanitizing the media.


3.3       IT Security Principles

Principle 1.        \   Establish a sound security policy as the 'foundation" for design.


                                 Initiation   Devel/Acquis    Implement      Oper/Maint         Disposal

        Applicability



Discussion: A security policy is an important document to develop while designing an
information system. The security policy begins with the organization's basic commitment to
information security formulated as a general policy statement.       The policy is then applied to all



SP 800-27                                            Page 6                                          3/21/01
aspects of the system design or security solution.        The poHcy identifies security goals (e.g.,
confidentiality, integrity, availability, accountability, and assurance) the system should support,
and these goals guide the procedures, standards and controls used in the IT security architecture
design.   The policy also should require definition of critical assets, the perceived threat, and security-
related roles and responsibilities.




Principle 2.      \   Treat security as an integral part of the overall system design.


                               Initiation    Devel/Acquis      Implement      Oper/Maint        Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Security must be considered in information system design. Experience has shown it
is very difficult to implement security measures properly and successfully after a system has been

developed, so it should be integrated fully into the system life-cycle process. This includes
establishing security policies, understanding the resulting security requirements, participating in
the evaluation of security products, and finally in the engineering, design, implementation, and
disposal of the system.




Principle 3.          Clearly delineate the physical and logical security boundaries governed by
                      associated security policies.


                               Initiation    Devel/Acquis      Implement      Oper/Maint        Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Information technology exists in physical and logical locations, and boundaries exist
between these locations.      An understanding of what is to be protected from external factors can
help ensure adequate protective measures are applied where they will be most effective.
Sometimes a boundary is defined by people, information, and information technology associated
with one physical location. But this ignores the reality that, within a single location, many
different security policies may be in place, some covering publicly accessible information and
some covering sensitive unclassified information. Other times a boundary is defined by a
security policy that governs a specific set of information and information technology that can
cross physical boundaries. Further complicating the matter is that, many times, a single machine
or server may house both public-access and sensitive unclassified information. As a result,
multiple security policies may apply to a single machine or within a single system. Therefore,
when developing an information system, security boundaries must be considered and
communicated in relevant system documentation and security policies.




SP 800-27                                             Page 7                                           3/21/01
Principle 4.          Reduce risk to an acceptable level.


                               Initiation   Devel/Acquis    Implement   Oper/Maint       Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Risk is defined as the combination of the probabihty that a particular threat source
will exploit, or trigger, a particular information system vulnerability and the resulting mission
impact should this occur. Previously, risk avoidance was a common IT security goal. That
changed as the nature of the risk became better understood. Today, it is recognized that
elimination of all risk is not cost-effective. A cost-benefit analysis should be conducted for each
proposed control. In some cases, the benefits of a more secure system may not justify the direct
and indirect costs. Benefits include more than just prevention of monetary loss; for example,
controls may be essential for maintaining public trust and confidence. Direct costs include the
cost of purchasing and installing a given technology; indirect costs include decreased system
performance and additional training. The goal is to enhance mission/business capabilities by
managing mission/business risk to an acceptable level.



Principle 5.      \   Assume that external systems are insecure.

                               Initiation   Devel/Acquis    Implement   Oper/Maint       Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: The term information domain arises from the practice of partitioning information
resources according to access control, need, and levels of protection required. Organizations
implement specific measures to enforce this partitioning and to provide for the deliberate flow of
authorized information between information domains. An external domain is one that is not
under your control.


In general, external systems should be considered insecure. Until an external domain has been
deemed "trusted," system engineers, architects, and IT specialists should presume the security
measures of an external system are different than those of a trusted internal system and design the
system security features accordingly.




                                                                                                        1




SP 800-27                                         Page 8                                      3/21/01
Principle 6.           Identify potential trade-offs between reducing risk and increased costs and
                       decrease in other aspects of operational effectiveness.


                                Initiation   Devel/Acquis       Implement       Oper/Maint        Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: To meet stated security requirements, a systems designer, architect, or security
practitioner will need to identify and address all competing operational needs.          It   may be
necessary to modify or adjust (i.e., trade-off) security goals due to other operational
requirements. In modifying or adjusting security goals, an acceptance of greater risk and cost
may be inevitable. By identifying and addressing these trade-offs as early as possible, decision
makers will have greater latitude and be able to achieve more effective systems.



Principle 7.       |
                       Implement layered security (Ensure no single point ofvulerability).


                                Initiation   Devel/Acquis       Implement       Oper/Maint        Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Security designs should consider a layered approach to address or protect against a
specific threat or to reduce a vulnerability.      For example, the use of a packet-filtering router in
conjunction with an application gateway and an intrusion detection system combine to increase
the work-factor an attacker must expend to successfully attack the system.           Adding good
password controls and adequate user training improves the system's security posture even more.


The need for layered protections is especially important when commercial-off-the-shelf (COTS)
products are used. Practical experience has shown that the current state-of-the-art for security
quality in COTS products does not provide a high degree of protection against sophisticated
attacks.    It is possible to help mitigate this   situation by placing several controls in series,
requiring additional work by attackers to accomplish their goals.




SP 800-27                                             Page 9                                           3/21/01
Principle 8.          Implement tailored system security measures to meet organizational security
                      goals.


                                  Initiation      Devel/Acquis    Implement      Oper/Maint      Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: In general, IT security measures are tailored according to an organization's unique
needs. While numerous factors, such as the overriding mission requirements, and guidance, are
to be considered, the fundamental issue is the protection of the mission or business from IT
security-related, negative impacts.            Because IT security needs are not uniform, system designers
and security practitioners should consider the level of trust when connecting to other external
networks and internal sub-domains. Recognizing the uniqueness of each system allows a layered
security strategy to be used - implementing lower assurance solutions with lower costs to protect
less critical systems and higher assurance solutions only at the most critical areas.




Principle 9.      \   Strive for simplicity.


                                  Initiation      Devel/Acquis    Implement      Oper/Maint      Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: The more complex the mechanism, the more likely it may possess exploitable flaws.
Simple mechanisms tend to have fewer exploitable flaws and require less maintenance. Further,
because configuration management issues are simplified, updating or replacing a simple
mechanism becomes a less intensive process.



Principle 10.         Design and operate an IT system to limit vulnerability and to be resilient in
                      response.


                               Initiation         Devel/Acquis    Implement      Oper/Maint     Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Information systems should be resistant to attack, should limit damage, and should
recover rapidly when attacks do occur. The principle suggested here recognizes the need for
adequate protection technologies at all levels to ensure that any potential cyber attack will be
countered effectively. There are vulnerabilities that cannot be fixed, those that have not yet been
fixed, those that are not known, and those that could be fixed but are not (e.g., risky services
allowed through firewalls) to allow increased operational capabilities. In addition to achieving a
secure initial state, secure systems should have a well-defined status after failure, either to a
secure failure state or via a recovery procedure to a known secure state. Organizations should
establish detect and respond capabilities, manage single points of failure in their systems, and
implement a reporting strategy.



SP 800-27                                               Page 10                                       3/21/01
Principle 11.         Minimize the system elements to be trusted.


                               Initiation    Devel/ Acquis   Implement       Oper/Maint       Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Security measures include people, operations, and technology.   Where technology is
used, hardware, firmware, and software should be designed and implemented so that a minimum
number of system elements need to be trusted in order to maintain protection. Further, to ensure
cost-effective and timely certification of system security features, it is important to minimize the
amount of software and hardware expected to provide the most secure functions for the system.



Principle 12.         Implement security through a combination of measures distributed physically
                      and logically.

                               Initiation   Devel/Acquis     Implement       Oper/Maint       Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Often, a single security service is achieved by cooperating elements existing on
separate machines. For example, system authentication is typically accomplished using elements
ranging from the user-interface on a workstation through the networking elements to an
application on an authentication server.      It is important to associate all elements with the security

service they provide.  These components are likely to be shared across systems to achieve
security as infrastructure resources come under more senior budget and operational control.


Principle 13.         Provide assurance that the system is, and continues to be, resilient in the face of
                      expected threats.


                               Initiation   Devel/Acquis     Implement       Oper/Maint       Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Assurance is the grounds for confidence that a system meets its security
expectations. These expectations can typically be summarized as providing sufficient resistance
to both direct penetration and attempts to circumvent security controls.      Good understanding of
the threat environment, evaluation of requirement sets, hardware and software engineering
disciphnes, and product and system evaluations are primary measures used to achieve assurance.
Additionally, the documentation of the specific and evolving threats is important in making
timely adjustments in applied security and strategically supporting incremental security
enhancements.




SP 800-27                                          Page 1                                          3/21/01
Principle 14.         Limit or contain vulnerabilities.


                                 Initiation   Devel/Acquis    Implement      Oper/Maint       Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Design systems to limit or contain vulnerabilities.       If a vulnerability does exist,

damage can be limited or contained, allowing other information system elements to function
properly. Limiting and containing insecurities also helps to focus response and reconstitution
efforts to information system areas most in need.




Principle 15.         Formulate security measures to address multiple overlapping information
                      domains.


                                 Initiation   Devel/Acquis    Implement      Oper/Maint       Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: An efficient and cost effective security capability should be able to enforce multiple
security policies to protect multiple information domains without the need to separate physically
the information and respective information systems processing the data. This principle argues for
moving away from the traditional practice of creating separate LANs and infrastructures for
various sensitivity levels and moving toward solutions that enable the use of common, shared,
public infrastructures with appropriate protections at the operating system, application, and
workstation level.


Moreover, to accomplish missions and protect critical functions, government and private sector
organizations have many types of information to safeguard.         With this principle in mind, system
engineers, architects, and IT specialists should develop a security capability that allows
organizations with multiple levels of information sensitivity to achieve the basic security goals in
an efficient manner.




Principle 16.         Isolate public access systems from mission critical resources (e.g., data,
                      processes, etc.).


                                 Initiation   Devel/Acquis    Implement     Oper/Maint        Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: While the trend toward shared infrastructure has considerable merit in almost all
cases, it is not universally applicable. In cases where the sensitivity or criticality of the
information is high, organizations may want to limit the number of systems on which that data is
stored and isolate them, either physically or logically. Physical isolation may include ensuring
that no physical connection exists between an organization's public access information resources




SP 800-27                                           Page 12                                        3/21/01
and an organization's critical information.       When implementing logical isolation solutions, layers
of security services and mechanisms should be established between public systems and secure
systems responsible for protecting mission critical resources. Security layers may include using
network architecture designs such as demilitarized zones and screened subnets. Finally, system
designers and administrators should enforce organizational security policies and procedures
regarding use of public access systems.




Principle 1 7.          Use boundary mechanisms to separate computing systems and network
                        infrastructures.



                                 Initiation   Devel/Acquis    Implement     Oper/Maint        Disposal

        Applicability



Discussion: To control the flow of information and access across network boundaries in
computing and communications infrastructures, and to enforce the proper separation of user
groups, a suite of access control devices and accompanying access control policies should be
used.


Determine the following for communications across network boundaries:

•   What external interfaces are required
•   Whether information is pushed or pulled

•   What ports, protocols, and network services are required
•   What requirements exist for system information exchanges; for example, trust relationships,
    database replication services, and domain name resolution processes.




Principle 18.           Where possible, base security on open standards for portability and
                        interoperability.


                                 Initiation   Devel/Acquis    Implement     Oper/Maint        Disposal

        Applicability



Discussion: Most organizations depend significantly on distributed information systems to
perform their mission or business. These systems distribute information both across their own
organization and to other organizations. For security capabilities to be effective in such
environments, security program designers should make every effort to incorporate
interoperability and portability into all security measures, including hardware and software, and
implementation practices.




SP 800-27                                           Page 13                                        3/21/01
Principle 19.         Use common language in developing security requirements.


                               Initiation   Devel/Acquis    Implement      Oper/Maint     Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: The use of a common language when developing security requirements permits
organizations to evaluate and compare security products and features evaluated in a common test
environment.    When a "common" evaluation process is based upon common requirements or
criteria, a level of confidence can be established that ensures product security functions conform

to an organization's security requirements.      A good source for this methodology is the Common
Criteria.




Principle 20.         Design and implement audit mechanisms to detect unauthorized use and to
                      support incident investigations.


                               Initiation   Devel/Acquis    Implement      Oper/Maint     Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Organizations should monitor, record, and periodically review audit logs to identify
unauthorized use and to ensure system resources are functioning properly. In some cases,
organizations may be required to disclose information obtained through auditing mechanisms to
appropriate third parties, including law enforcement authorities or Freedom of Information Act
(FOIA) applicants. Many organizations have implemented consent to monitor policies which
state that evidence of unauthorized use (e.g., audit trails) may be used to support administrative

or criminal investigations.




Principle 21.         Design security to allow for regular adoption of new technology, including a
                      secure and logical technology upgrade process.


                               Initiation   Devel/Acquis    Implement      Oper/Maint     Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: As mission and business processes change, security requirements and technical
protection methods must be updated. FT-related risks to the mission/business vary over time and
undergo periodic assessment. Periodic assessment should be performed to enable system
designers and managers to make informed risk management decisions on whether to accept or
mitigate identified risks with changes or updates to the security capability.   The lack of timely
identification through consistent security solution re-evaluation and correction of evolving,
applicable IT vulnerabilities results in false trust and increased risk.




SP 800-27                                         Page 14                                       3/21/01
Each security mechanism should be able to support migration to new technology or upgrade of
new features without requiring an entire system redesign. The security design should be modular
so that individual parts of the security design can be upgraded without the requirement to modify
the entire system. Although this is a goal, the struggle to achieve this ultimately results in a
debate of COTS vendor product alignments versus self-maintained interface code.




Principle 22.         Authenticate users and processes to ensure appropriate access control
                      decisions both within and across domains.


                               Initiation   Devel/Acquis     Implement   Oper/Maint      Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Authentication is the process where a system establishes the validity of a
transmission, message, or a means of verifying the eligibility of an individual, process, or
machine to carry out a desired action, thereby ensuring that security is not compromised by an
untrusted source. It is essential that adequate authentication be achieved in order to implement
security policies and achieve security goals. Additionally, level of trust is always an issue when
dealing with cross-domain interactions.   The solution is to establish an authentication policy and
apply it to cross-domain interactions as required. Note: A user may have rights to use more than
one name in multiple domains. Further, rights may differ among the domains, potentially leading
to security policy violations.




Principle 23.         Use unique identities to ensure accountability.


                               Initiation   Devel/Acquis     Implement   Oper/Maint      Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: An identity may represent an actual user or a process with its own identity, e.g., a
program making a remote access. Unique identities are a required element in order to be able to:

•   Maintain accountability and traceability of a user or process
•   Assign specific rights to an individual user or process
•   Provide for non-repudiation
•   Enforce access control decisions
•   Establish the identity of a peer in a secure communications path
•   Prevent unauthorized users from masquerading as an authorized user.




SP 800-27                                         Page 15                                      3/21/01
Principle 24.          Implement least privilege.


                                Initiation    Devel/Acquis      Implement         Oper/Maint       Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion:
The concept of limiting access, or "least privilege," is simply to provide no more authorizations
than necessary to perform required functions. This is perhaps most often applied in the
administration of the system.        Its goal is to reduce risk by limiting the   number of people with
access to critical system security controls; i.e., controlling who is allowed to enable or disable
system security features or change the privileges of users or programs. Best practice suggests it
is better to have several administrators with limited access to security resources rather than one

person with "super user" permissions.


Consideration should be given to implementing role-based access controls for various aspects of
system use, not only administration. The system security policy can identify and define the
various roles of users or processes. Each role is assigned those permissions needed to perform its
functions. Each permission specifies a permitted access to a particular resource (such as "read"
and "write" access to a specified file or directory, "connect" access to a given host and port, etc.).
Unless a permission is granted explicitly, the user or process should not be able to access the
protected resource.




Principle 25.      \   Do not implement unnecessary security mechanisms.

                                Initiation    Devel/Acquis      Implement         Oper/Maint       Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Every security mechanism should support a security service or set of services, and
every security service should support one or more security goals. Extra measures should not be
implemented if they do not support a recognized service or security goal. Such mechanisms
could add unneeded complexity to the system and are potential sources of additional
vulnerabilities.


An example is file encryption supporting the access control service that in turn supports the goals
of confidentiality and integrity by preventing unauthorized file access.           If file encryption is a

necessary part of accomplishing the goals, then the mechanism is appropriate. However, if these
security goals are adequately supported without inclusion of file encryption, then that mechanism
would be an unneeded system complexity.




SP 800-27                                            Page 16                                            3/21/01
Principle 26.         Protect information while being processed, in transit, and in storage.


                               Initiation    Devel/Acquis    Implement     Oper/Maint      Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: The risk of unauthorized modification or destruction of data, disclosure of
information, and denial of access to data while in transit should be considered along with the
risks associated with data that is in storage or being processed. Therefore, system engineers,
architects, and IT specialists should implement security measures to preserve, as needed, the
integrity, confidentiality, and availability of data, including application software, while the

information is being processed, in transmit, and in storage.




Principle 27.     \
                      Strive for operational ease of use.


                               Initiation    Devel/Acquis    Implement     Oper/Maint      Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: The more difficult it is to maintain and operate a security control, the less effective
that control is likely to be. Therefore, security controls should be designed with ease-of-use as an
important consideration. The experience and expertise of administrators and users should be
appropriate and proportional to the operation of the security control.    An organization must invest
the resources necessary to ensure system administrators and users are properly trained.
Moreover, administrator and user training costs along with the life-cycle operational costs should
be considered when determining the cost-effectiveness of the security control.



Principle 28.         Develop and exercise contingency or disaster recovery procedures to ensure
                      appropriate availability.


                               Initiation    Devel/Acquis    Implement     Oper/Maint      Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Continuity of operations plans or disaster recovery procedures address continuance
of an organization's operation in the event of a disaster or prolonged service interruption that
affects the organization's mission. Such plans should address an emergency response phase, a
recovery phase, and a return to normal operation phase. Personnel responsibilities during an
incident and available resources should be identified. In reality, contingency and disaster
recovery plans do not address every possible scenario or assumption. Rather, it focuses on the
events most likely to occur and identifies an acceptable method of recovery. Periodically, the
plans and procedures should be exercised to ensure that they are effective and well understood.




SP 800-27                                          Page 17                                        3/21/01
                                                                        "




Principle 29.         Consider custom products to achieve adequate security.


                               Initiation    Devel/Acquis     Implement     Oper/Maint        Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Designers should recognize that in some instances it will not be possible to meet
security goals with systems constructed entirely from COTS products. In such instances, it will
be necessary to use augment COTS with non-COTS mechanisms.



Principle 30.     \   Ensure proper security in the shutdown or disposal of a system.


                               Initiation    Devel/Acquis     Implement     Oper/Maint        Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Although a system may be powered down, critical information still resides on the
system and could be retrieved by an unauthorized user or organization. Access to critical
information systems must be controlled at all times.


At the end of a system's life-cycle, system designers should develop procedures to dispose of an
information system's assets in a proper and secure fashion. Procedures must be implemented to
ensure system hard drives, volatile memory, and other media are purged to an acceptable level
and do not retain residual information.



Principle 31.         Protect against all likely classes of "attacks.


                               Initiation    Devel/Acquis     Implement     Oper/Maint        Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: In designing the security controls, multiple classes of "attacks" need to be
considered. Those classes that result in unacceptable risk need to be mitigated.         Examples of
"attack" classes are: Passive monitoring, active network attacks, exploitation by insiders, attacks
requiring physical access or proximity, and the insertion of backdoors and malicious code during
software development and/or distribution.




SP 800-27                                          Page 18                                            3/21/01
Principle 32.         Identify and prevent common errors and vulnerabilities.


                               Initiation   Devel/Acquis    Implement     Oper/Maint      Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: Many errors reoccur with disturbing regularity - errors such as buffer overflows, race
conditions, format string errors, failing to check input for validity, and programs being given
excessive privileges. Learning from the past will improve future results.


Principle 33.     \   Ensure that developers are trained in how to develop secure software.


                               Initiation   Devel/Acquis    Implement     Oper/Maint      Disposal

      Applicability



Discussion: It is unwise to assume that developers know how to develop secure software.
Therefore, ensure that developers are adequately trained in the development of secure software
before developing the system.


3.4     Principle/Life-cycle Summary


Table 3-2 below summarizes the relationship between the 33 principles above and the life-cycles
to which they apply.




SP 800-27                                         Page 19                                      3/21/01
                     Table 3-2: Principles versus Life-Cycles

                                                Life-Cycle Applicability

        Principle   lIllLiaLlUU   L/C VCiy/ALmilb      iiiipiciiiciu              Disposal

             1



            2

            3

            4

            5

            6

            7

            8

            9

            10

            11


            12

            13

            14

            15

            16

            17

            18

            19

            20

            21

            22

            23

            24

            25                        w w

            26

            27                                                             \/%/

            28

            29

            30

            31

            32

            33




SP 800-27                                Page 20                                       3/21/01
4.0     SUMMARY

Now, more than ever, IT security is a critical element in the system Hfe-cycle. Security must be
incorporated and addressed from the initial planning and design phases to disposal of the system.
Without proper attention to security, an organization's information technology can become a
source of significant mission risks. With careful planning from the earliest stages, however,
security becomes an enabler, supporting and helping to achieve the organization's mission.


As security awareness becomes a way of life within an organization, people at all levels, and
roles in the system life-cycle, should have access to easily understood guidance.   From users to
system administrators and program managers, everyone should have a basic understanding of the
security principles governing the system they are using, maintaining, or designing and
developing.


This document provides a starting point. The principles contained herein are derived from a
number of national and international documents, as well as from the experience of the scientists
at NIST. It is hoped that these principles will contribute to improved IT security in any

organization.




SP 800-27                                     Page 21                                        3/21/01
                              Appendix A-IT Specialist positions

Within the Federal Government the Office of Personnel Management (OPM) has recently created
an Information Technology Management series occupation title of Information Technology
Specialist.   Within the IT Specialist occupation OPM has identified several specialty areas
referred to as "parenthetical titles" that are added to the basic occupational title.   OPM created
these titles in an effort to assist in determining what type of occupational skills are needed to
properly address systems security issues during the system life-cycle and to achieve some degree
of standardization in referring to those who play key roles in systems security.    The parenthetical
titles indicate the types of employees that would have primary action for the systems security

efforts during systems development. Skill levels will vary by individual, so assignment of an
employee to a specific task is a management decision.


The table below relates the skills and knowledge found in a given specialty area to the systems
security role within a given phase of the system life-cycle development process. This
information is provided so that organizations can address the appropriate engineering principles
in the roles and responsibilities section of organizations' system IT life-cycle policies, employee
performance plans, and in the required duties section of position descriptions.     It is   noted that
within a given organization, roles may differ from this list of specialties.


                          Table A-1: Specialty Area versus Life-Cycles

Specialty Area                                   System Development Life- Cycle Phase
                                    Initiation   Development/    Implement     Operation &       Disposal
                                                  Acquisition                  Maintenance
Customer Support Specialty
Data Management Specialty
Information Systems Security
Specialty
Internet Specialty
Network Services Specialty
Policy, Planning and
Management Specialty
Software Engineering,
Applications Specialty
Software Engineering,
Systems Specialty
System Administration
Specialty
Systems Analysis Specialty




SP 800-27                                          A-1                                             3/21/01
                                  Appendix B-Definitions

Term                Definition


access control      Enable authorized use of a resource while preventing unauthorized use or
                    use in an unauthorized manner.


accountability      The security goal that generates the requirement for actions of an entity to
                    be traced uniquely to that entity. This supports non-repudiation,
                    deterrence, fault isolation, intrusion detection and prevention, and after-
                    action recovery and legal action.


assurance           Grounds for confidence that the other four security goals (integrity,
                    availability, confidentiality, and accountability) have been adequately met

                    by a specific implementation. "Adequately met" includes (1)
                    functionality that performs correctly, (2) sufficient protection against
                    unintentional errors (by users or software), and (3) sufficient resistance to
                    intentional penetration or by-pass.


authentication      Verifying the identity of a user, process, or device, often as a prerequisite
                    to allowing access to resources in a system.


authorization       The granting or denying of access rights to a user, program, or process.

availability        The security goal that generates the requirement for protection against
                    intentional or accidental attempts to (1) perform unauthorized deletion of
                    data or (2) otherwise cause a denial of service or data.


confidentiality     The security goal that generates the requirement for protection from
                    intentional or accidental attempts to perform unauthorized data reads.
                    Confidentiality covers data in storage, during processing, and while in
                    transit.



data integrity      The property that data has not been altered in an unauthorized manner.
                    Data integrity covers data in storage, during processing, and while in
                    transit.



denial of service   The prevention of authorized access to resources or the delaying of time-
                    critical operations.   (Time-critical may be milliseconds or it may be hours,
                    depending upon the service provided.)


domain              See security domain.




 SP 800-27                                     B-1                                             3/21/01
entity             Either a subject (an active element that operates on information or the
                   system state) or an object (a passive element that contains or receives
                   information).


general support    An interconnected information resource under the same direct
system             management control that shares common functionality. It normally
                   includes hardware, software, information, data, applications,
                   communications, facilities, and people and provides support for a variety
                   of users and/or applications. Individual applications support different
                   mission-related functions. Users may be from the same or different
                   organizations.




integrity          The security goal that generates the requirement for protection against
                   either intentional or accidental attempts to violate data integrity (the
                   property that data has not been altered in an unauthorized manner) or
                   system integrity (the quality that a system has when it performs its
                   intended function in an unimpaired manner, free from unauthorized
                   manipulation).


identity           Information that is unique within a security domain and which is
                   recognized as denoting a particular entity within that domain.



IT-related risk    The net mission/business impact considering (1) the probability that a
                   particular threat source will exploit, or trigger, a particular information
                   system vulnerability and (2) the resulting impact if this should occur. IT-
                   related risks arise from legal liability or mission/business loss due to, but
                   not limited to:
                   1.   Unauthorized (malicious, non-malicious, or accidental) disclosure,
                        modification, or destruction of information.
                   2.   Non-malicious errors and omissions.
                   3.   IT disruptions due to natural or man-made disasters.
                   4.   Failure to exercise due care and diligence in the implementation and
                        operation of the IT.


IT security        A description of security principles and an overall approach for complying
architecture       with the principles that drive the system design; i.e., guidelines on the
                   placement and implementation of specific security services within various
                   distributed computing environments.


IT security goal   See "Security goal."




 SP 800-27                                     B-2                                            3/21/01
major application   An application that requires special attention to security due to the risk
                    and magnitude of the harm resulting from the loss, misuse, or
                    unauthorized access to, or modification of, the information in the
                    application.   A breach in a major application might comprise many
                    individual application programs and hardware, software, and
                    telecommunications components. Major applications can be either major
                    software applications or a combination of hardware/software where the
                    only purpose of the system is to support a specific mission-related
                    function.


object              A passive entity that contains or receives information. Note that access to
                    an object potentially implies access to the information it contains.


risk                Within this document, synonymous with "IT-related risk."


risk analysis       The process of identifying the risks to system security and determining the
                    probability of occurrence, the resulting impact, and the additional
                    safeguards that mitigate this impact. Part of risk management and
                    synonymous with risk assessment.

risk assessment     See risk analysis.


risk management     The ongoing process of assessing the risk to mission/business as part of a
                    risk-based approach used to determine adequate security for a system by
                    analyzing the threats and vulnerabilities and selecting appropriate, cost-
                    effective controls to achieve and maintain an acceptable level or risk.


security            Security is a system property. Security is much more than a set of
                    functions and mechanisms. IT security is a system characteristic as well
                    as a set of mechanisms that span the system both logically and physically.


security domain     A set of subjects, their information objects, and a common security policy.

security policy     The statement of required protection of the information objects.

security goals      The five security goals are confidentiality, availability, integrity,
                    accountability, and assurance.


security service    A capability that supports one, or many, of the security goals. Examples
                    of security services are key management, access control, and
                    authentication.


subject             An active entity, generally in the form of a person, process, or device, that
                    causes information to flow among objects or changes the system state.




 SP 800-27                                    B-3                                           3/21/01
system integrity   The quality that a system has when it performs its intended function in an
                   unimpaired manner, free from unauthorized manipulation of the system,
                   whether intentional or accidental.


threat             Any circumstance or event with the potential to harm an information
                   system through unauthorized access, destruction, disclosure, modification
                   of data, and/or denial of service. Threats arise from human actions and
                   natural events.


threat source      Either (1) intent and method targeted at the intentional exploitation of a
                   vulnerability or (2) the situation and method that may accidentally trigger
                   a vulnerability.


threat analysis    The examination of threat sources against system vulnerabilities to
                   determine the threats for a particular system in a particular operational
                   environment.


vulnerability      A weakness in system security requirements, design, implementation, or
                   operation, that could be accidentally triggered or intentionally exploited
                   and result in a violation of the system's security policy.




 SP 800-27                                   B-4                                          3/21/01
                                        Appendix C - References


Management of Federal Information Resources, Circular A-130, Office of Management and
Budget (0MB). http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars/al30/al30trans4.html

Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation (CC), Version 2.1, August
1999. http://www.commoncriteria.org/


Department of Defense Global Information Grid Information Assurance, Department of Defense
Chief Information Officer Guidance and Policy Memorandum No, 6-8510.
http://www.c3i.osd.mil/org/cio/doc/gigia061600.pdf


Generally Accepted Principles and Practices for Securing Information Technology Systems, SP
800-14, National Institute of Standards and Technology, September 1996.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/index.html


Guide for Developing Security Plans for Information Technology Systems, SP 800-18, National
Institute of Standards and Technology, December 1998.
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/index.html


Information Assurance Technical Framework (lATF), Release 3.0, October 2000.
http://www.iatf.net/   ,
                           member-only area, site registration at: https://www.iatf.net/register/

Job Family Position Classification Standard for Administrative Work in the Information
Technology Group Series (Draft), GS-2200A, Office of Personnel Management.
http://www.opm.gov/fedclass/html/draft.htm


NSTISSI No. 4009, National Information Systems Security (INFOSEC) Glossary, (Revision 1),
January 1999. http://www.nstissc.gov/Assets/pdf/4009.pdf. While the majority of NSTISSI-
4009 definitions are used, some of the definitions in Appendix B have been determined to be
more appropriate to the task of defining a technical baseline for IT security than similar
definitions in NSTISSI-4009.




SP 800-27                                            C-1                                            3/21/01
1
                                    Technical Publications
Periodical

                                                                                     —
Journal of Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Reports NIST research
and development in those disciplines of the physical and engineering sciences in which the Institute is
active. These include physics, chemistry, engineering, mathematics, and computer sciences. Papers cover a
broad range of subjects, with major emphasis on measurement methodology and the basic technology
underlying standardization. Also included from time to time are survey articles on topics closely related to
the Institute's technical and scientific programs. Issued six times a year.




Nonperiodicals

Monographs   —Major                                        on
                         contributions to the technical literature   various subjects related to the
                    and
Institute's scientific     technical activities.

Handbooks—Recommended codes of engineering and                                        codes)
                                                            industrial practice (including safety          devel-
oped  incooperation with                                              and regulatory
                            interested industries, professional organizations,                  bodies.
Special Publications— Include proceedings of conferences sponsored by NIST, NIST annual              reports, and
other special publications appropriate to this grouping such as wall charts, pocket cards, and bibliographies.

                                                   —
National Standard Reference Data Series Provides quantitative data on the physical and chemical
properties of materials, compiled from the world's literature and critically evaluated. Developed under a
worldwide program coordinated by NIST under the authority of the National Standard Data Act (Public
Law 90-396). NOTE: The Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data (JPCRD) is published
bimonthly for NIST by the American Institute of Physics (AIP). Subscription orders and renewals are
available from AIR RO. Box 503284, St. Louis,          MO
                                                      63150-3284.
                           —
Building Science Series Disseminates technical information developed at the Institute on building
materials, components, systems, and whole structures. The series presents research results, test methods, and
performance criteria related to the structural and environmental functions and the durability and safety
characteristics of building elements and systems.

                  —
Technical Notes Smdies or reports which are complete in themselves but restrictive in their treatment of
a subject. Analogous to monographs but not so comprehensive in scope or definitive in treatment of the
subject area. Often serve as a vehicle for final reports of work performed at NIST under the sponsorship of
other government agencies.
Voluntary Product Standards       —Developed under procedures published by        the Department of Commerce
in Part 10, Title 15, of the Code of Federal Regulations. The standards establish nationally recognized
requirements for products, and provide all concerned interests with a basis for common understanding of
the characteristics of the products. NIST administers this program in support of the efforts of private-sector
standardizing organizations.

Order the following NIST publications     —FIPS and NISTIRs—from the National Technical Information
Service, Springfield, VA 22161.

Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUB)              —  Publications in this series
collectively constitute the Federal Information Processing Standards Register. The Register serves as the
official source of information in the Federal Government regarding standards issued by NIST pursuant to
the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended, Public Law 89-306 (79 Stat.
1127), and as implemented by Executive Order 11717 (38 FR 12315, dated May 11, 1973) and Part 6 of
Title 15   CFR (Code of Federal Regulations).
NIST Interagency or Internal Reports (NISTIR)           —
                                                       ^The series includes interim or final reports on work
performed by NIST for outside sponsors (both government and nongovernment). In general, initial
distribution is handled by the sponsor; public distribution is handled by sales through the National Technical
Information Service, Springfield, VA 22161, in hard copy, electronic media, or microfiche form. NISTIR's
may also report results of NIST projects of transitory or limited interest, including those that will be
published subsequently in more comprehensive form.
    u
    B
    B1
    o T3
(J C
        (33


    O   1/3
                              u
    c o             Q
    S 3
              O t        3

Q go g
    .
              r(u
                    S2
                    a>   .2   >.

    •
.




              So         o    (Si
