                       Archived NIST Technical Series Publication
The attached publication has been archived (withdrawn), and is provided solely for historical purposes.
It may have been superseded by another publication (indicated below).

Archived Publication
Series/Number:            NIST Special Publication 800-14
Title:
                          Generally Accepted Principles and Practices for Securing
                          Information Technology Systems
Publication Date(s):      September 1996
Withdrawal Date:          March 16, 2018
Withdrawal Note:
                          SP 800-14 is withdrawn in its entirety. Revised content can be found in
                          SP 800-12 Rev. 1, SP 800-53, SP 800-30, SP 800-37, and SP 800-39.


Superseding Publication(s)
The attached publication has been superseded by the following publication(s):

Series/Number:
Title:


Author(s):


Publication Date(s):
URL/DOI:


Additional Information (if applicable)
Contact:                 Computer Security Division (Information Technology Laboratory)
Latest revision of the
attached publication:
Related information:
                         https://csrc.nist.gov/publications
                         https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/risk-management
Withdrawal
                         N/A
announcement (link):




Date updated: March 16, 2018
    NIST Special Publication 800-14   Generally Accepted Principles and
                                      Practices for Securing Information
    U.S. DEPARTMENT OF
    COMMERCE                          Technology Systems
    Technology Administration
    National Institute of Standards
    and Technology                     Marianne Swanson and Barbara Guttman



i




I




            COMPUTER                                   SECURITY
rhe National      Institute   of Standards and Technology was established in 1988 by Congress
      to "assist industry in the development of technology .   .needed to improve product quality,
                                                                   .




to modernize    manufacturing   processes, to ensure product reliability.   .and to facilitate rapid
                                                                                .




commercialization ... of products based on new scientific discoveries."
       NIST, originally founded as the National Bureau of Standards in 1901, works to strengthen
U.S. industry's competitiveness; advance science and engineering; and improve public health,
safety, and the environment. One of the agency's basic functions is to develop, maintain, and retain
custody of the national standards of measurement, and provide the means and methods for
comparing standards used in science, engineering, manufacturing, commerce, industry, and
education with the standards adopted or recognized by the Federal Government.
       As an agency of the U.S. Commerce Department's Technology Administration, NIST
conducts basic and applied research in the physical sciences and engineering, and develops
measurement techniques, test methods, standards, and related services. The Institute does generic
and precompetitive work on new and advanced technologies. NIST's research facilities are located
at Gaithersburg, MD  20899, and at Boulder, CO 80303. For more information contact the Public
Inquiries Desk, 301-975-3058.
NisT Special Publication 800-14   Generally Accepted Principles and
                                  Practices for Securing Information
                                  Technology Systems

                                  Marianne Swanson and Barbara Guttman




    COMPUTER                                       SECURITY
                                  Computer Systems Laboratory
                                  National Institute of Standards
                                  and Technology
                                  Gaithersburg,   MD 20899-0001



                                  September 1996




                                  U.S. Department of Commerce
                                  Michael Kantor, Secretary

                                  Technology Administration
                                  Mary L. Good, Under Secretary for Technology
                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                  Arati Prabhakar, Director
                         Reports on Computer Systems Technology

   The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has a unique responsibility for computer
systems technology within the Federal government. NIST's Computer Systems Laboratory (CSL) devel-
ops standards and guidelines, provides technical assistance, and conducts research for computers and
related telecommunications systems to achieve more effective utilization of Federal information technol-
ogy resources. CSL's responsibilities include development of technical, management, physical, and ad-
ministrative standards and guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive unclassified
information processed in Federal computers. CSL assists agencies in developing security plans and in
improving computer security awareness training. This Special Publication 800 series reports CSL re-
search and guidelines to Federal agencies as well as to organizations in industry, government, and
academia.




    National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-14
       Natl. Inst. Stand. Technoi. Spec. Publ. 800-14, 61 pages (Sept. 1996)
                                          CODEN: NSPUE2




                            U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                        WASHINGTON: 1996

For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402
                                                                            Principles and Practices
                                                                            for Securing IT Systems




Table of Contents

1.   Introduction                                                                                    1

         1.1   Principles                                                                            1

         1.2 Practices                                                                               1

         1.3   Relationship of Principles and Practices                                              2
         1.4   Background                                                                            2
         1.5   Audience                                                                              3
         1.6 Structure of this Document                                                              3
         1.7   Terminology                                                                           3


2.   Generally Accepted System Security Principles                                                   4
         2.1 Computer Security Supports the Mission of the Organization                    5
         2.2 Computer Security is an Integral Element of Sound Management                  6
         2.3 Computer Security Should Be Cost-Effective                                    6
         2.4 Systems Owners Have Security Responsibilities Outside Their Own Organizations
                                                                                                     7
         2.5   Computer Security Responsibilities and Accountability Should Be Made Explicit  8  .




         2.6   Computer Security Requires a Comprehensive and Integrated Approach             9
         2.7   Computer Security Should Be Periodically Reassessed                            9
         2.8   Computer Security is Constrained by Societal Factors                          10


3.   Common IT Security Practices                                                                11
         3.1   Policy                                                                            13
                  3.1.1   Program Policy                                                         13
                  3.1.2 Issue-Specific Policy                                                    14
                  3.1.3 System-Specific Policy                                                   14
                  3.1.4 All Policies                                                             15
         3.2   Program Management                                                                16
                  3.2.1   Central Security Program                                               16
                  3.2.2 System-Level Program                                                     17
         3.3 Risk Management                                                                     19
                  3.3.1   Risk Assessment                                                        19
                  3.3.2 Risk Mitigation                                                         20
                  3.3.3 Uncertainty Analysis                                                    21
         3.4 Life Cycle Planning                                                                22
                  3.4.1   Security Plan                                                         22
                  3.4.2 Initiation Phase                                                        22
                  3.4.3   Development/Acquisition Phase                                         22
                  3.4.4 Implementation Phase                                                    23



                                                     iii
                                                                 Principles and Practices
                                                                 for Securing IT Systems



          3.4.5 Operation/Maintenance Phase                                           24
          3.4.6 Disposal Phase                                                        26
3.5 Personnel/User Issues                                                             27
          3.5.1     Staffing                                                          27
             User Administration
          3.5.2                                                                       28
3.6 Preparing for Contingencies and Disasters                                         31
          3.6.1     Business Plan                                                     31
          3.6.2 Identify Resources                                                    31
             Develop Scenarios
          3.6.3                                                                       32
       3.6.4 Develop Strategies                                                       32
       3.6.5 Test and Revise Plan                                                     33
3.7 Computer Security Incident Handling                                               34
       3.7.1 Uses of a Capability                                                     34
          3.7.2 Characteristics                                                       34
3.8    Awareness and Training                                                         37
3.9 Security Considerations in Computer Support and Operations                        39
3.10 Physical and Environmental Security                                              41
3.11    Identification and Authentication                                             43
          3.11.1     Identification                                                   43
          3.11.2 Authentication                                                       44
          3.1 1.3    Passwords                                                       45
          3.11.4     Advanced Authentication                                         45
3.12 Logical Access Control                                                          46
          3.12.1     Access Criteria                                                 46
          3.12.2 Access Control Mechanisms                                           47
3.13 Audit Trails                                                                    50
          3.13.1 Contents of Audit Trail Records                                     50
          3.13.2 Audit Trail Security                                                51
          3.13.3 Audit Trail Reviews                                                 51
          3.13.4 Keystroke Monitoring                                                52
3.14 Cryptography                                                                    54
4.    References                                                                     56




                                            iv
                                                                                Principles and Practices
                                                                                for Securing IT Systems



1.   Introduction
As more organizations share information electronically, a common understanding of what is
needed and expected in securing information technology (IT) resources is required. This
document provides a basehne that organizations can use to establish and review their IT security
programs. The document gives a foundation that organizations can reference when conducting

multi-organizational business as well as internal business.   Management, internal auditors, users,
system developers, and security practioners can use the guideline to gain an understanding of the

basic security requirements most IT systems should contain.      The foundation begins with
generally accepted system security principles and continues with common practices that are used

in securing IT systems.




1.1 Principles

Many approaches and methods can be used to secure IT systems; however, certain intrinsic
expectations must be met whether the system is small or large or owned by a government agency

or by a private corporation. The intrinsic expectations are described in this document as

generally accepted system security principles. The principles address computer security from a

very high-level viewpoint. The principles are to be used when developing computer security

programs and policy and when creating new systems, practices or policies. Principles are
expressed at a high level, encompassing broad areas, e.g., accountability, cost effectiveness, and

integration.




1.2 Practices

The next level in the foundation is the common IT security practices that are in general use
today.   The practices guide organizations on the types of controls, objectives and procedures that
comprise an effective IT security program. The practices show what should be done to enhance
or measure an existing computer security program or to aid in the development of a new

program. The practices provide a common ground for determining the security of an

organization and build confidence when conducting multi-organizational business. This

document provides the practices in a checklist format to assist organizations in reviewing their
current policies and procedures against the common practices presented here. Organizations

should use the practices as a starting point in order to develop additional practices based on their



                                                  1
                                                                                   Principles and Practices
                                                                                   for Securing IT Systems



own organizational and system requirements. The common practices should be augmented with
additional practices based on each organization's unique needs.        The practices described in this
publication come from NIST Special Publication 800-12,          An Introduction to Computer
Security: The NIST Handbook.         They are not intended to be definitive; as technology changes,
so will the practices.



1.3 Relationship of Principles and Practices

This document describes eight principles and fourteen practices. Each of the principles applies

to each of the practices.     The nature of the relationship between the principles and the practices
varies.   In some cases, practices are derived from one or more principles; in other cases practices

are constrained by principles. For example, the Risk Management Practice is directly derived

from the Cost-Effectiveness Principle. However, the Comprehensive and Reassessment
Principles place constraints on the Risk Management Practice.



While a mapping could be made to the specific relationships between the principles and the
practices, it is probably not useful.    The important point is that the principles provide the
foundation for a sound computer security program.



1.4   Background
The National Performance Review (NPR) recommended as part of the National Information
Infrastructure (Nil) that the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) develop

generally accepted system security principles and practices for the federal government.           These
security principles and practices are to be applied in the use, protection, and design of

government information and data systems, particularly front-line systems for delivering services
electronically to citizens.



The need for rules, standards, conventions and procedures that define accepted security practices
was outlined in the 1991 National Research Council document Computers At Risk. Their
recommendation called for the development of a comprehensive set of generally accepted system
security principles (GSSP) which would clearly articulate essential security features, assurances,

and practices.   Work began on implementing the Computers At Risk recommendation in 1992



                                                     2
                                                                                Principles and Practices
                                                                               for Securing IT Systems



by several national and international organizations with an interest in computer security. This
document draws upon their ongoing efforts.



 1.5   Audience
This document has two distinct uses. The chapter covering principles is to be used by all levels

of management and by those individuals responsible for computer security at the system level

and organization level. The principles are intended as a guide when creating program policy or

reviewing existing policy. The common practices are intended as a reference document and an

auditing tool.   The goal of this document is to provide a common baseline of requirements that
can be used within and outside organizations by internal auditors, managers, users and computer

security officers.   The concepts presented are generic and can be applied to organizations in
private and public sectors.



1.6 Structure of this Document

This document is organized as follows: Chapter 2 presents the principles. Chapter 3 contains

the common IT security practices. Chapter 4 provides references used in the development of this

document.



1.7    Terminology
This document uses the terms information technology security and computer security

interchangeably.     The terms refer to the entire spectrum of information technology including
application and support systems.    Computer security is the protection afforded to an automated
information system in order to attain the applicable objectives of preserving the integrity,

availability, and confidentiality of information system resources (including hardware, software,

firmware, information data, and telecommunications).
                                                                                                              Principles and Practices
                                                                                                            for Securing IT Systems




2.   Generally Accepted System Security Principles
As the name implies, the principles are generally accepted ~ that which is most commonly being
used at the present time to secure IT resources. The principles that this document offers are not

new to the security profession. They are based on the premise that (most) everyone applies these
when developing or maintaining a system
and they have become generally accepted.
                                                                OBCD's Guidelines for the Security of Information Systems
This document uses the Organization for                                                                                         :




                                                             Accountability - The responsibilities and accountability of owners,
Economic Co-operation and Development's
                                                                providers and users of information systems and other parties... should

(OECD) Guidelines for the Security of                           be explicit.


Information Systems as the base for the                      Awareness - Owners, providers, users and other parties should
                                                             readUy be able, consistent with maintaining security, to gain

principles.    The OECD Guidelines were                      appropriate knowledge of and be informed about the existence and
                                                             pneral extent of measures. ..for the security of information systems.
developed in 1992 by a group of
                                                             Ethics ' The Information systems and the security of information

international experts to provide a foundation                systems should be provided and used in such a manner that the rights
                                                             and legitimate interest of others are respected.
from which governments and the private
                                                             Muhidisciplinary - Measures, practices and procedures for the
sector, acting singly and in concert, could                  security of information systems should take account of and address
                                                             all relevant considerations and viewpoints....

construct a framework for securing IT
                                                             Proportionality - Security levels, costs, measures, practices and
systems.    The OECD Guidelines are the                      procedures should be appropriate and proportionate to the value of
                                                             and degree of reliance on the infomiation systems and to the severity,
current international guidelines which have                  probability and extent of potential harm.,..


been endorsed by the United States.           A brief        Integration - Measures, practices and procedures for the security of
                                                             information systems should be coordinated and integrated with each
description of the nine       OECD principles is             other and other measures, practices and procedures of the
                                                             organization so as to create a coherent system of security.
provided in Figure 1      .   Using the spirit of
                                                             Timeliness - Public and private parties, at both national and
the Guidelines, NIST developed principles                    international levels, should act in a timely coordinated manner to
                                                             prevent and to respond to breaches of security of information systems.
which applies to federal systems.'           In
                                                             Reassessment - The security of information systems should be
developing this set of principles, NIST drew                 reassessed periodically, as information systems and the requirements
                                                             for their security vary over time.
upon the OECD Guidelines, added material,
                                                             Democracy - The security of information systems should be
combined some principles, and rewrote                        compatible with the legitimate use and flow of data and information
                                                             in a democratic society.
others.   Most of the rewriting and
                                                             Figure 1.     OECD Guidelines.
combining was done to provide clarity. The
principles added by NIST are in keeping




     The eight principles originally appeared as the "Elements of Computer Security" in the NIST Special Publication 800-
12, An Introduction to Computer Security:    The NIST Handbook.


                                                            4
                                                                                 Principles and Practices
                                                                                for Securing IT Systems


with the OECD principles but not directly stated. For example, NIST added the principle that

Computer Security Support the Mission of the Organization.      Prior to developing these

principles, NIST thoroughly reviewed what is currently being accomplished in the IT Security

principles area.   With much consideration, a determination was made that the U.S. Government
would benefit from its own set of principles.


The eight principles contained in this document provide an anchor on which the Federal
community should base their IT security programs. These principles are intended to guide
agency personnel when creating new systems, practices, or policies. They are not designed to
produce specific answers. The principles should be applied as a whole, pragmatically and
reasonably.   Each principle is expressed as a one-line section heading and explained in the
paragraphs that immediately follow.



2.1   Computer Security Supports the Mission of the Organization
The purpose of computer security is to protect an organization's valuable resources, such as
information, hardware, and software. Through the selection and application of appropriate

safeguards, security helps the organization's mission by protecting its physical and financial

resources, reputation, legal position, employees, and other tangible and intangible assets.

Unfortunately, security is sometimes viewed as thwarting the mission of the organization by

imposing poorly selected, bothersome rules and procedures on users, managers, and systems.
On the contrary, well-chosen security rules and procedures do not exist for their own sake ~ they
are put in place to protect important assets and support the overall organizational mission.

Security, therefore, is a means to an end and not an end in itself. For example, in a private-

sector business, having good security is usually secondary to the need to make a profit. Security,

then, ought to increase the firm's ability to make a profit. In a public-sector agency, security is

usually secondary to the agency's providing services to citizens. Security, then, ought to help

improve the service provided to the citizen.


To act on this, managers need to understand both their organizational mission and how each
information system supports that mission. After a system's role has been defined, the security

requirements implicit in that role can be defined. Security can then be explicitly stated in terms

of the organization's mission.


                                                  5
                                                                                  Principles and Practices
                                                                                 for Securing IT Systems



The roles and functions of a system may not be restricted to a single organization.     In an

interorganizational system, each organization benefits from securing the system. For example,

for electronic commerce to be successful, each participant requires security controls to protect

their resources.     However, good security on the buyer's system also benefits the seller; the
buyer's system is less likely to be used for fraud or to be unavailable or otherwise negatively

affect the seller.   (The reverse is also true.)



2.2   Computer Security is an Integral Element of Sound Management
Information and IT systems are often critical assets that support the mission of an organization.

Protecting them can be as important as protecting other organizational resources, such as money,

physical assets, or employees.



However, including security considerations in the management of information and computers
does not completely eliminate the possibility that these assets will be harmed. Ultimately,

organization managers have to decide what level of risk they are willing to accept, taking into

account the cost of security controls.



As with other resources, the management of information and computers may transcend
organizational boundaries.      When an organization's information and IT systems are linked with
external systems, management's responsibilities extend beyond the organization. This requires

that management ( 1 ) know what general level or type of security is employed on the external

system(s) or (2) seek assurance that the external system provides adequate security for their

organization's needs.



2.3   Computer Security Should Be Cost-Effective
The costs and benefits of security should be carefully examined in both monetary and non-
monetary terms to ensure that the cost of controls does not exceed expected benefits.       Security

should be appropriate and proportionate to the value of and degree of reliance on the IT systems

and to the severity, probability, and extent of potential harm. Requirements for security vary,
depending upon the particular IT system.




                                                    6
                                                                                 Principles and Practices
                                                                                 for Securing IT Systems



In general, security is a smart business practice.   By investing in security measures, an
organization can reduce the frequency and severity of computer security-related losses. For

example, an organization may estimate that it is experiencing significant losses per year in

inventory through fraudulent manipulation of its IT system. Security measures, such as an

improved access control system, may significantly reduce the loss.


Moreover, a sound security program can thwart hackers and reduce the frequency of viruses.
Elimination of these kinds of threats can reduce unfavorable publicity as well as increase morale

and productivity.


Security benefits do have both direct and indirect costs. Direct costs include purchasing,

installing, and administering security measures, such as access control software or fire-

suppression systems. Additionally, security measures can sometimes affect system performance,

employee morale, or retraining requirements. All of these have to be considered in addition to
the basic cost of the control itself In many cases, these additional costs may well exceed the

initial cost of the control (as is often seen, for example, in the costs of administering an access

control package). Solutions to security problems should not be chosen if they cost more, in

monetary or non monetary terms, directly or indirectly, than simply tolerating the problem.



2.4   Systems Owners Have Security Responsibilities Outside Their Own
Organizations
If a system has external users, its owners have a responsibility to share appropriate knowledge

about the existence and general extent of security measures so that other users can be confident

that the system is adequately secure. This does not imply that all systems must meet any

minimum level of security, but does imply that system owners should inform their clients or
users about the nature of the security.




                                                     7
                                                                                                     Principles and Practices
                                                                                                    for Securing IT Systems



In addition to sharing information about security, organization managers "should act in a timely,

coordinated manner to prevent and to respond to breaches of security" to help prevent damage to

others.^      However, taking such action should nor jeopardize the security of systems.



2.5      Computer Security Responsibilities and Accountability Should Be Made
Explicit

The responsibility and accountability^ of owners, providers, and users of IT systems and other
parties'* concerned with the security of IT systems should be explicit.^                    The assignment of
responsibilities may be internal to an organization or may extend across organizational

boundaries.

Depending on the size of the organization, the computer security program may be large or small,
even a collateral duty of another management official. However, even small organizations can
prepare a document that states organization policy and makes explicit computer security

responsibilities. This element does not specify that individual accountability must be provided

for on all systems.        For example, many information dissemination systems do not require user
identification or use other technical means of user identification and, therefore, cannot hold users

accountable.




   ^   Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, Guidelines for the Security of Information Systems,
Paris, 1992.


   ^
     The difference between responsibility and accountability is not always clear. In general, responsibility is a broader
term, defining obligations and expected behavior.  The term implies a proactive stance on the part of the responsible
party and a causal relationship between the responsible party and a given outcome. The term accountability generally
refers to the ability to hold people responsible for their actions. Therefore, people could be responsible for their actions
but not held accountable. For example, an anonymous user on a system is responsible for behaving according to
accepted norms but cannot be held accountable if a compromise occurs since the action cannot be traced to an
individual.


       The term other parties may include but is not limited to: executive management; programmers; maintenance
providers; information system managers (software managers, operations managers, and network managers); software
development managers; managers charged with security of information systems; and internal and external information
system auditors.


   ^   This principle implicitly states that people and other entities (such as corporations or governments) have
responsibility and accountability related to IT systems which may be shared.



                                                               8
                                                                               Principles and Practices
                                                                              for Securing IT Systems



2.6   Computer Security Requires a Comprehensive and Integrated Approach
Providing effective computer security requires a comprehensive approach that considers a

variety of areas both within and outside of the computer security field. This comprehensive

approach extends throughout the entire information life cycle.



To work effectively, security controls often depend upon the proper functioning of other
controls.   Many such interdependencies exist. If appropriately chosen, managerial, operational,
and technical controls can work together synergistically.   On the other hand, without a firm
understanding of the interdependencies of security controls, they can actually undermine one

another. For example, without proper training on how and when to use a virus-detection

package, the user may apply the package incorrectly and, therefore, ineffectively.   As a result,
the user may mistakenly believe that if their system has been checked once, that it will always be

virus-free and may inadvertently spread a virus. In reality, these interdependencies are usually

more complicated and difficult to ascertain.


The effectiveness of security controls also depends on such factors as system management, legal
issues, quality assurance, and internal and management controls.   Computer security needs to
work with traditional security disciplines including physical and personnel security. Many other
important interdependencies exist that are often unique to the organization or system

environment. Managers should recognize how computer security relates to other areas of

systems and organizational management.



2.7   Computer Security Should Be Periodically Reassessed
Computers and the environments in which they operate are dynamic. System technology and
users, data and information in the systems, risks associated with the system, and security

requirements are ever-changing.    Many types of changes affect system security: technological
developments (whether adopted by the system owner or available for use by others); connection
to external networks; a change in the value or use of information; or the emergence of a new

threat.




In addition, security is never perfect when a system is implemented.   System users and operators
discover new ways to intentionally or unintentionally bypass or subvert security. Changes in the


                                                 9
                                                                                  Principles and Practices
                                                                                 for Securing IT Systems



system or the environment can create new vulnerabilities.      Strict adherence to procedures is rare

and procedures become outdated over time. These issues make it necessary to reassess
periodically the security of IT systems.



2.8   Computer Security is Constrained by Societal Factors
The ability of security to support the mission of an organization may be limited by various
factors, such as social issues.   For example, security and workplace privacy can conflict.
Commonly, security is implemented on an IT system by identifying users and tracking their
actions.   However, expectations of privacy vary and can be violated by some security measures.
(In some cases, privacy may be mandated by law.)



Although privacy is an extremely important societal issue, it is not the only one. The flow of
information, especially between a government and its citizens, is another situation where

security may need to be modified to support a societal goal. In addition, some authentication

measures may be considered invasive in some environments and cultures.


Security measures should be selected and implemented with a recognition of the rights and

legitimate interests of others. This may involve balancing the security needs of information

owners and users with societal goals. However, rules and expectations change with regard to the
appropriate use of security controls. These changes may either increase or decrease security.



The relationship between security and societal norms is not necessarily antagonistic. Security
can enhance the access and flow of data and information by providing more accurate and reliable

information and greater availability of systems. Security can also increase the privacy afforded

to an individual or help achieve other goals set by society.




                                                  10
                                                                                  Principles and Practices
                                                                                  for Securing IT Systems



3.   Common IT Security Practices
The goal of this chapter is to assist the time-constrained security manager in reviewing their
current policies and procedures against the common practices presented here.       The list is not
exhaustive; agencies should consider them as the minimum set. These practices are the ones

currently employed in an effective computer security program.       They do not take into account
environmental or technological constraints, nor are they relevant to every situation. This chapter

should be augmented with additional practices based on each agencies' unique requirements.



The practices serve as a companion to the NIST Special Publication, 800-12, An Introduction to
Computer Security: The NIST Handbook. The NIST Handbook contains over 200 pages of
assistance in securing computer-based resources.       The document explains important concepts,
cost considerations, and interrelationships of security controls.   It provides a broad overview of


computer security and is an excellent primer for anyone interested in computer security.          The
NIST Handbook provides the "why to" and served as the template for deriving the practices.


Each chapter of the NIST Handbook was carefully reviewed to determine which sections denoted
a practice and which parts were explanation, detail, or example.     The key points of each chapter
along with a short explanation were placed into a practice format.      Some disparity exists,
however, in the way the practices are presented. In some sections, it was easy to provide a

checklist of what should be considered when, for example, an agency is developing a

contingency plan. It was much more difficult to design a checklist of practices for types of

technical controls, such as audit trails. In the audit trail section, the reader will find more of a

laundry list of what should be considered. Whether the section is a technical control or an

operational or management control, each section is formatted as a practice.



Each section begins with a brief explanation of the control and a synopsis of the practice. The
controls are then divided into subsections with practices listed below.    Each practice appears
with a small box placed to the left of it. In most cases, the practice is followed with a brief

explanation or example. This section provides the "what" should be done, not the "why" or the

"how." Several documents should be referenced for further information. The NIST Handbook

should be used to obtain additional detail on any of the practices listed. The NIST Handbook

will easily map to this chapter since the chapters are placed in the same order as the subsections.


                                                  11
                                                                                     Principles and Practices
                                                                                     for Securing IT Systems



The handbook also provides many references for further study. This document and the NIST
Handbook are available electronically as follows:


Anonymous ftp: csrc.nist.gov (129.6.54.1 1) in the directory nistpubs/800-12
URL: http://csrc.nist.gov/nistpubs/800-12
Dial-up with modem: 301-948-5717



In the early development of this chapter, NIST considered obtaining a copyright release for an

excellent practices document that originated in the United Kingdom. Copyright was not

obtainable; however, the document was referenced while preparing this chapter.           The Code of
Practice for Information Security Management           is written in a similar style and offers short


concise practices in IT security.   It is highly   recommended that this document be obtained as an
excellent source for additional information.       The document is the British Standard 7799, A Code
of Practice for Information Security Management. For ordering information, contact BSI
Standards at the following:



BSI Standards
389 Cheswick High Road
London W4 4AL
United Kingdom
44-181-996-9000




                                                     12
                                                                                 Principles and Practices
                                                                                 for Securing IT Systems




3.1     Policy

The term computer security policy has more than one meaning. PoUcy is senior management's
directives to create a computer security program, estabUsh its goals, and assign responsibilities.

The term policy is also used to refer to the specific security rules for particular systems.
Additionally, policy may refer to entirely different matters, such as the specific managerial

decisions setting an organization's e-mail privacy policy or fax security policy.



Organizations should have the following three different types of policy: Program, Issue-

Specific, and System Specific.    (Some organizations may refer to these types with other names
such as directives, procedures, or plans.)



3.1.1   Program Policy
An organization's program policy should:


         Create and Define a Computer Security Program. Program policy should be clear as

         to which resources — including facilities, hardware, and software, information, and

         personnel — the computer security program covers.



         Set Organizational Strategic Directions. This may include defining the goals of the

         program. For instance, in an organization responsible for maintaining large mission-
         critical databases, reduction in errors, data loss, data corruption, and recovery might be

         specifically stressed.



         Assign Responsibilities. Responsibilities should be assigned to the computer security

         organization for direct program implementation and other responsibilities should be

         assigned to related offices (such as the Information Resources Management

         organization).



         Address Compliance Issues. Program policy typically addresses two compliance
         issues: 1 ) meeting the requirements to establish a program and the responsibilities




                                                  13
                                                                                 Principles and Practices
                                                                               for Securing IT Systems



       assigned therein to various organizational components, and 2) the use of specified

       penalties and disciplinary actions.



3.1.2 Issue-Specific Policy

An organization's issue-specific policies should:


Q      Address Specific Areas. Topics of current relevance and concern to the organization
       should be addressed. Management may find it appropriate, for example, to issue a policy

       on how the organization will approach e-mail privacy or Internet connectivity.


HI     Be Updated Frequently. More frequent modification is required as changes in
       technology and related factors take place.    If a policy was issued, for example, on the

       appropriate use of a cutting-edge technology (whose security vulnerabilities are still

       largely unknown) within the organization, it could require updating.



       Contain an Issue Statement. The organization 's position statement, applicability, roles
       and responsibilities, compliance, and point of contact should be clear.


3.1.3 System-Specific Policy

An organization's system-specific policies should:


m      Focus on Decisions.     The decisions taken by management to protect a particular system,

       such as defining the extent to which individuals will be held accountable for their actions

       on the system, should be explicitly stated.



12     Be Made by Management Official. The decisions management makes should be based
       on a technical analysis.



B      Vary From System to System. Variances will occur because each system needs defined
       security objectives based on the system's operational requirements, environment, and the




                                                14
                                                                               Principles and Practices
                                                                              for Securing IT Systems



       manager's acceptance of risk. In addition, policies will vary based on differing needs for
       detail.




       Be Expressed as Rules.     Who (by job category, organization placement, or name) can
       do what (e.g., modify, delete) to which specific classes and records of data, and under
       what conditions.


3.1.4 All Policies

All three types of policy should be:



       Supplemented. Because policy may be written at a broad level, organizations also
       develop standards, guidelines, and procedures that offer users, managers, and others a

       clearer approach to implementing policy and meeting organizational goals. Standards,

       guidelines, and procedures may be disseminated throughout an organization via

       handbooks, regulations, or manuals.



       Visible. Visibility aids implementation of policy by helping to ensure policy is fully

       communicated throughout the organization.


       Supported by Management. Without management support, the policy will become an
       empty token of management's "commitment" to security.


       Consistent.    Other directives, laws, organizational culture, guidelines, procedures, and

       organizational mission should be considered.




                                                15
                                                                                 Principles and Practices
                                                                                 for Securing IT Systems



3.2   Program Management
Managing computer security at multiple levels brings many benefits. Each level contributes to
the overall computer security program with different types of expertise, authority, and resources.

In general, executive managers (such as those at the headquarters level) better understand the

organization as a whole and have more authority.       On the other hand, front-line managers (at the
computer facility and applications levels) are more familiar with the specific requirements, both
technical and procedural, and problems of the systems and the users.     The levels of computer
security program management should be complementary each can help the other be more
                                                            ;




effective.   Many organizations have at least two levels of computer security management; the
central level and the system level.



3.2.1 Central Security Program

A central security program should provide distinct types of benefits: increased efficiency and
economy of security throughout the organization and the ability to provide centralized
enforcement and oversight.     It should have the following:




H       Stable Program Management Function. The program management function should be

        stable and recognized within the organization as a focal point for computer security.

        However complex or simple the program management function is, it requires a stable
        base, including resources, to perform its activities.



H       Existence of Policy.     A program should be based on organizational policy and should
        create policy, standards, and procedures, as appropriate to address the computer

        security needs of the organization.



        Published Mission and Functions Statement. The statement should clearly establish

        the function of the computer security program and define responsibilities for the

        computer security program and other related programs and entities.      It is often a part of

        organizational policy.




                                                  16
                                                                                  Principles and Practices
                                                                                 for Securing IT Systems



       Long-Term Computer Security Strategies. A program should explore and develop
       long-term strategies to incorporate computer security into the next generation of

       information technology.



       Compliance Program. A central computer security program needs to address
       compliance with national policies and requirements, as well as organization- specific

       requirements.



       Intraorganizational Liaison. Computer security often overlaps with other offices, such

       as safety, reliability and quality assurance, internal control, physical security, or the

       Office of the Inspector General.    An effective program should have established
       relationships with these groups in order to integrate computer security into the

       organization's management.



       Liaison with External Groups. An established program should be knowledgeable of

       and take advantage of external sources of information.      It should also provide

       information, as appropriate, to external groups.



3.2.2 System-Level Program

While the central program addresses the entire spectrum of computer security for an
organization, system-level computer security programs ensure appropriate and cost-effective

security for each system. System-level computer security programs may address, for example,

the computing resources within an operational element, a major application, or a group of

similar systems (either technologically or functionally).   They should have the following:


Oljj   System-Specific Security Policy. The system policy should document the system

       security rules for operating or developing the system, such as defining authorized and

       unauthorized modifications.



       Life Cycle Management. Systems should be managed to ensure appropriate and cost-

       effective security.   This specifically includes ensuring that security is authorized by




                                                   17
                                                                      Principles and Practices
                                                                      for Securing IT Systems



appropriate management and that changes to the system are made with attention to

security (also see Section 3.4).



Appropriate Integration with System Operations. The people who run the system
security program should understand the system, its mission, its technology, and its

operating environment. Effective security management needs to be integrated into the

management of the system. However, if a computer security program lacks appropriate
independence, it may have minimal authority, receive little management attention, and

have few resources.




                                        18
                                                                                     Principles and Practices
                                                                                    for Securing IT Systems



3.3 Risk Management

Risk is the possibility of something adverse happening. Risk management is the process of

assessing risk, taking steps to reduce risk to an acceptable level and maintaining that level of

risk.   Risk management requires the analysis of risk, relative to potential benefits, consideration

of alternatives, and, finally, implementation of what management determines to be the best

course of action. Risk management consists of two primary and one underlying activity; risk

assessment and risk mitigation are the primary activities and uncertainty analysis is the

underlying one.     An organization should consider the following when assessing risks.


3.3.1   Risk Assessment

Risk assessment, the process of analyzing and interpreting risk, is comprised of three basic

activities:




H        Determine the Assessment's Scope and Methodology. The first step in assessing risk
          is to identify the system under consideration,   the part of the system that will be analyzed,

         and the analytical method including its level of detail and formality.


          Collecting and Analyzing Data. The         many different components of risk should be
          examined.     This examination normally includes gathering data about the threatened

          area and synthesizing and analyzing the information to make it useful. The types of areas

          are:



          -   Asset Valuation. These include the information, software, personnel, hardware, and

              physical assets (such as the computer facility). The value of an asset consists of its

              intrinsic value and the near-term impacts and long-term consequences of its

              compromise.


          -   Consequence Assessment. The consequence assessment estimates the degree of harm
              or loss that could occur.



          -   Threat Identification.   A threat is an entity or event with the potential to harm the
              system.   Typical threats are errors, fraud, disgruntled employees, fires, water damage,


                                                      19
                                                                                     Principles and Practices
                                                                                    for Securing IT Systems



             hackers, and viruses.   Threats should be identified and analyzed to determine the

             likelihood of their occurrence and their potential to harm assets.



         -   Safeguard Analysis. Safeguard analysis should include an examination of the

             effectiveness of the existing security measures.



         -   Vulnerability Analysis.     A vulnerability is a condition or weakness in ( or absence of)
             security procedures, technical controls, physical controls, or other controls that could

             be exploited by a threat.


         -   Likelihood Assessment. Likelihood is an estimation of the frequency or chance of a

             threat happening.   A likelihood assessment considers the presence, tenacity, and
             strengths of threats as well as the effectiveness of safeguards (or presence of

             vulnerabilities).



[ill     Interpreting Risk Assessment Results.            The risk assessment must produce a

        meaningful output that reflects what is truly important to the organization. The risk

         assessment is used to support two related functions: the acceptance of risk and the

        selection of cost-effective controls.



3.3.2   Risk Mitigation
Risk mitigation involves the selection and implementation of security controls to reduce risk to a

level acceptable to management.        Although there is flexibility in how risk assessment is
conducted, the process of risk mitigation has greater flexibility than the sequence of events

conducted in a risk assessment. The following activities are discussed in a specific sequence;
however, they need not be performed in that sequence.



\^       Select Safeguards. The identification of appropriate controls is a primary function of

         computer security risk management.         In selecting appropriate controls, the following

        factors should be considered:



         -   organizational policy, legislation, and regulation;


                                                     20
                                                                               Principles and Practices
                                                                               for Securing IT Systems


       -   safety, reliability, and quality requirements;

       -   system performance requirements;

       -   timeliness, accuracy, and completeness requirements;

       -   the life cycle costs of security measures;

       -   technical requirements; and

       -   cultural constraints.



       Accept Residual Risk. Management needs to decide if the operation of the IT system is
       acceptable, given the kind and severity of remaining risks. The acceptance of risk is

       closely linked with the authorization to use a IT system, often called accreditation.

       (Accreditation is the acceptance of risk by management resulting in a formal approval

       for the system to become operational or remain so.)



       Implementing Controls and Monitoring Effectiveness. The safeguards selected need
       to be effectively implemented.   To continue to be effective, risk management needs to be
       an ongoing process. This requires a periodic assessment and improvement of safeguards
       and reanalysis of risks.


3.3.3 Uncertainty Analysis

Risk management must often rely on speculation, best guesses, incomplete data, and many

unproven assumptions.    An uncertainty analysis should be performed and documented so that the
risk management results can be used knowledgeably.      There are two primary sources of

uncertainty in the risk management process: (1) a lack of confidence or precision in the risk

management model or methodology, and (2) a lack of sufficient information to determine the
exact value of the elements of the risk model, such as threat frequency, safeguard effectiveness,

or consequences.




                                                 21
                                                                                Principles and Practices
                                                                               for Securing IT Systems



3.4 Life Cycle Planning

Security, like other aspects of an IT system, is best managed if planned for throughout the IT

system life cycle. There are many models for the IT system life cycle but most contain five
basic phases: initiation, development/acquisition, implementation, operation, and disposal.



3.4.1 Security Plan

Organizations should ensure that security activities are accomplished during each of the phases.



       Prepare a Security Plan. A security plan should be used to ensure that security is
       considered during all phases of the IT system life cycle.



3.4.2 Initiation Phase

During the initiation phase, the need for a system is expressed and the purpose of the system is
documented.


n      Conduct a Sensitivity Assessment. A sensitivity assessment looks at the sensitivity of
       the information to be processed and the system itself.



3.4.3 Development/Acquisition Phase

During this phase, the system is designed, purchased, programmed, developed, or otherwise
constructed. This phase often consists of other defined cycles, such as the system development

cycle or the acquisition cycle.   The following steps should be considered during this phase:


       Determine Security Requirements. During the first part of the development/
       acquisition phase, security requirements should be developed at the same time system

       planners define the requirements of the system. These requirements can be expressed as

       technical features (e.g., access controls), assurances (e.g., background checks for system

       developers), or operational practices (e.g., awareness and training).



       Incorporate Security Requirements Into Specifications. Determining security

       features, assurances, and operational practices can yield significant security information




                                                  22
                                                                                    Principles and Practices
                                                                                   for Securing IT Systems



        and often voluminous requirements. This information needs to be validated, updated,
        and organized into the detailed security protection requirements and specifications used
        by systems designers or purchasers.


        Obtain the System and Related Security Activities. If the system is being built,
        security activities may include developing the system's security features, monitoring the

        development process itselffor security problems, responding to changes, and monitoring

        threats.    Threats or vulnerabilities that may arise during the development phase include

         Trojan horses, incorrect code, poorly functioning development tools, manipulation of

        code, and malicious insiders.



                   If the system is being acquired off the shelf security activities may include

                   monitoring to ensure security is a part of market surveys, contract solicitation

                   documents, and evaluation of proposed systems.     Many systems use a combination
                   of development and acquisition. In this case, security activities include both sets.



                   In addition to obtaining the system, operational practices need to be developed.

                   These refer to human activities that take place around the system such as

                   contingency planning, awareness and training, and preparing documentation.



3.4.4   Implementation Phase
During implementation, the system is tested and installed or fielded. The following items should
be considered during this phase:



H       Install/Turn-On Controls. While obvious, this activity is often overlooked. When

        acquired, a system often comes with security features disabled.       These need to be enabled

        and configured.


        Security Testing. System security testing includes both the testing of the particular parts

        of the system that have been developed or acquired and the testing of the entire system.
        Security management, physical facilities, personnel, procedures, the use of commercial

        or in-house services (such as networking services), and contingency planning are


                                                    23
                                                                                    Principles and Practices
                                                                                    for Securing IT Systems



        examples of areas that affect the security of the entire system, but may have been
        specified outside of the development or acquisition cycle.



        Accreditation. System security accreditation is the formal authorization by the

        accrediting (management) official for system operation and an explicit acceptance of

         risk.   It is usually supported by a review of the system,   including its management,

         operational, and technical controls.



3.4.5   Operation/Maintenance Phase
During this phase, the system performs its work. The system is almost always being
continuously modified by the addition of hardware and software and by numerous other events.

The following high-level items should be considered during this phase:


        Security Operations and Administration. Operation of a system involves many

        security activities discussed in this publication. Performing backups, holding training

        classes, managing cryptographic keys, keeping up with user administration and access

        privileges, and updating security software are some examples.



        Operational Assurance. Operational assurance examines whether a system is operated

        according to its current security requirements. This includes both the actions of people

        who operate or use the system and the functioning of technical controls.


        Audits and Monitoring. To maintain operational assurance, organizations use two

        basic methods: system audits and monitoring. These terms are used loosely within the

        computer security community and often overlap.        A system audit is a one-time or periodic
        event to evaluate security. Monitoring refers to an ongoing activity that examines either

        the system or the users. In general, the more "real-time" an activity is, the more it falls

        into the category of monitoring.     Figure 2 describes the various forms of auditing and

        monitoring.




                                                    24
                                                                                                  Principles and Practices
                                                                                                  for Securing IT Systems




                                               Audit and Monitoring Techniques


Audit Types. Audits can be self-administered or independent (either internal or external). Both types can provide
excellent information about technical, procedural, managerial, or other aspects of security.      The essential difference
between a self-audit and an independent audit is objectivity.


            Automated Tools. Automated tools can be used to help find a variety of vulnerabilities, such as improper
            access controls or access control configurations, weak passwords, lack of integrity of the system software,
            or not using all relevant software updates and patches. There are two types of automated tools: (1) active
            tools, which    find vulnerabilities by trying to exploit them, and (2) passive tests, which only examine the
            system and infer the existence of problems from the state of the system.


            Internal Controls Audit      An auditor can review controls in place and determine whether they are effective.
            The auditor will often analyze both computer and noncomputer-based controls.

            Security Checklists.    Checklists can be developed, which include national or organizational security policies
            and practices (often referred to as baselines).


*           Penetration Testing. Penetration testing can use many methods to attempt a system break-in. In addition
            to using active automated tools as described above, penetration testing can be done "manually."      For many
            systems, lax procedures or a lack of internal controls on applications are common vulnerabilities that
            penetration testing can target. Penetration testing is a very powerful technique; it should preferably be
            conducted with the knowledge and consent of system management.


Monitoring Types. There are many types and methods of monitoring a system or user.             Some methods are deemed
more socially acceptable and some are illegal. It is wise to check with agency legal council.

»•          Review of System Logs.            A periodic review of system-generated logs can detect security problems,
            including attempts to exceed access authority or gain system access during unusual hours.


»           Automated Tools.        Several types of automated tools monitor a system for security problems.         Some
            examples are virus scanners, checksumming, password crackers, integrity verification programs, intrusion
            detectors, and system performance monitoring.


            Configuration Management/Managing Change.           From a security point of view, configuration management
            provides assurance that the system in operation is the correct version (configuration) of the system and that
            any changes to be made are reviewed for security implications.

••
            Trade Literature/EHiblications/Electronic News. In addition to monitoring the system, it is useful to monitor
            external sources for information.


            Periodic Reaccreditation. Periodically, it is useful to formally reexamine the security of a system from a
            wider perspective. Hie analysis, which leads to reaccreditation, should address such questions as: Is the
            security still sufficient?   Are major changes needed? The reaccreditation should address high-level security
            and management concerns as well as the implementation of the security.


     Figure 2. Audit and Monitoring Techniques.




                                                              25
                                                                                 Principles and Practices
                                                                                for Securing IT Systems



3.4.6 Disposal Phase

The disposal phase of the IT system life cycle involves the disposition of information, hardware,
and software. The following items should be considered during this phase:


H      Information. Information may be moved to another system, archived, discarded, or

       destroyed.   When archiving information, consider the method for retrieving the
       information in the future. While electronic information is generally easier to retrieve and

       store, the technology used to create the records may not be readily available in the

       future.   Measures may also have to be taken for the future use of data that has been
       encrypted, such as taking appropriate steps to ensure the secure long-term storage of

       cryptographic keys.    It is important to consider legal requirements for records retention


       when disposing of IT systems. For federal systems, system management officials should
       consult with their agency office responsible for retaining and archiving federal records.



       Media Sanitization. The removal of information from a storage medium (such as a hard
       disk or tape) is called sanitization. Different kinds of sanitization provide different levels

       of protection.   A distinction can be made between clearing information (rendering it
       unrecoverable by keyboard attack) and purging (rendering information unrecoverable

       against laboratory attack). There are three general methods of purging media:

       overwriting, degaussing (for magnetic media only), and destruction.




                                                 26
                                                                                  Principles and Practices
                                                                                 for Securing IT Systems



3.5 Personnel/User Issues

Many important issues in computer security involve users, designers, implementors, and
managers.   A broad range of security issues relate to how these individuals interact with
computers and the access and authorities they need to do their job.     No IT system can be secured
without properly addressing these security issues.



3.5.1 Staffing

An organization's staffing process should generally involve at least the following four steps
which apply equally to general users as well as to application managers, system management
personnel, and security personnel:



m      Position Definition. Early in the process of defining a position, security issues should

       be identified and addressed. Once a position has been broadly defined, the responsible

       supervisor should determine the type of computer access needed for the position. There

       are two general security rules to apply when granting access: separation of duties and

       least privilege.



                 Separation of duties refers to dividing roles and responsibilities so that a single

                 individual cannot subvert a critical process.   For example, in financial systems,
                 no single individual should normally be given authority to issue checks. Rather,
                 one person initiates a request for a payment and another authorizes that same
               payment.



               Least privilege refers to the security objective of granting users only those

                 accesses they need to perform their official duties. Data entry clerks, for

                 example, may not have any need to run analysis reports of their database.



r~l    Determining Position Sensitivity. The responsible manager should determine the
       position sensitivity, based on the duties and access levels, so that appropriate cost-

       effective screening can be completed.




                                                  27
                                                                                   Principles and Practices
                                                                                  for Securing IT Systems



H        Screening. Background screening helps determine whether a particular individual is

         suitable for a given position. In general, it is more effective to use separation of duties

         and least privilege to limit the sensitivity of the position, rather than relying on screening
         to reduce the risk to the organization.




H        Employee Training and Awareness. Employees should be trained in the computer
         security responsibilities and duties associated with their jobs.



3.5.2   User Administration
Organizations should ensure effective administration of users' computer access to maintain

system security, including user account management, auditing and the timely modification or

removal of access. The following should be considered:


H           User Account Management. Organizations should have a process for (1)
            requesting, establishing, issuing, and closing user accounts; (2) tracking users and

            their respective access authorizations; and (3) managing these functions.




H           Audit and Management Reviews. It is necessary to periodically review user
            account management on a system.        Reviews should examine the levels of access each
            individual has, conformity with the concept of least privilege, whether all accounts

            are still active, whether management authorizations are up-to-date, whether required

            training has been completed, and so forth.    These reviews can be conducted on at

            least two levels: (1) onan application-by-application basis, or (2) on a system wide

            basis.




LJ          Detecting Unauthorized/Illegal Activities. Mechanisms besides auditing and

            analysis of audit trails should be used to detect unauthorized and illegal acts.

            Rotating employees in sensitive positions, which could expose a scam that required an

            employee's presence, or periodic rescreening of personnel are methods that can be

            used.




                                                   28
                                                                          Principles and Practices
                                                                         for Securing IT Systems



13   Friendly Termination. Friendly terminations should be accomplished by

     implementing a standard set of procedures for outgoing or transferring employees.

     This normally includes:



         removal of access privileges, computer accounts, authentication tokens,



         the control of keys,



         the briefing on the continuing responsibilities for confidentiality and privacy,



         return of property, and



         continued availability of data. In both the manual and the electronic worlds, this

         may involve documenting procedures or filing schemes, such as how documents
         are stored on the hard disk, and how are they backed up. Employees should be

         instructed whether or not to "clean up" their   PC before leaving. If cryptography
         is used to protect data,   the availability of cryptographic keys to management

         personnel must be ensured.



     Unfriendly Termination. Given the potential for adverse consequences,

     organizations should do the following:



         System access should be terminated as quickly as possible when an employee is

         leaving a position under less than friendly terms. If employees are to be fired,

         system access should be removed at the same time (or just before) the employees

         are notified of their dismissal.



         When an employee notifies an organization of a resignation and it can be
         reasonably expected that it is on unfriendly terms, system access should be

         immediately terminated.




                                            29
                                                               Principles and Practices
                                                               for Securing IT Systems



During the "notice of termination" period, it may be necessary to assign the
individual to a restricted area and function. This may be particularly true for

employees capable of changing programs or modifying the system or
applications.



In some cases, physical removal from the offices may be necessary.




                                30
                                                                                            Principles and Practices
                                                                                            for Securing IT Systems



         3.6   Preparing for Contingencies and Disasters
     Contingency planning directly supports an organization's goal of continued operations.
     Organizations should practice contingency planning because it makes good business sense.

     Contingency planning addresses how to keep an organization's critical functions operating in the
     event of disruptions, both large and small. This broad perspective on contingency planning is

     based on the distribution of computer support throughout an organization. The following six

     steps describe the basic functions an organization should employ when developing contingency

     plans.



     3.6.1 Business Plan

     An organization should identify mission- or business-critical functions. The identification of
     critical functions is often called a business plan.




     I    I     Identify Functions and Priorities. The business plan should identify functions and set

                priorities for them. In the event of a disaster, certain functions will not be performed. If

                appropriate priorities have been set ( and approved by senior management), it could

                mean the difference in the organization 's ability to survive a disaster.


     3.6.2 Identify Resources

     An organization should identify the resources that support critical functions. Contingency
     planning should address all the resources needed to perform a function.



                Analyze Resources Needed. The analysis of needed resources should be conducted by
                those who understand how the function is performed and the interdependencies among

                various resources. This allows an organization to assign priorities to resources since not

                all elements are crucial to the critical functions.




                Overlap of Areas. The identification of resources should cross managers' areas of
                responsibility.




I'                                                        31
I
                                                                                Principles and Practices
                                                                               for Securing IT Systems



         Common Resources Used.        The following is a list of resources used by most

         organizations:



                People

                Processing Capability (e.g., mainframes, personal computers)

                Computer-Based Services (e.g., telecommunications, world wide web)
                Data and Applications
                Physical Infrastructure

                Documents and Papers (e.g., documentation, blank forms, legal documents)


         Time Frame Needed. In addition, an organization should identify the time frames in
         which each resource is used (e.g., is the resource needed constantly or only at the end of
         the month?), and the effect on the mission or business of the continued unavailability of

         the resource.



3.6.3   Develop Scenarios
An organization should anticipate potential contingencies or disasters. The development of
scenarios should help an organization develop a plan to address the wide range of things that can

go wrong. The following items should be considered:


            Identify Possible Scenarios. Although it is impossible to think of all the things that

            can go wrong, an organization should identify a likely range of problems. Scenarios

            should include small and large contingencies. While some general classes of

            contingency scenarios are obvious, imagination and creativity, as well as research,

            can point to other possible, but less obvious, contingencies.


            Address Each Resource. The contingency scenarios should address each of the
            resources listed above.



3.6.4   Develop Strategies
The selection of a contingency planning strategy should be based on practical considerations,
including feasibility and cost. Risk assessment can be used to help estimate the cost of options


                                                 32
                                                                                 Principles and Practices
                                                                                 for Securing IT Systems



to decide on an optimal strategy.    For example, is it more expensive to purchase and maintain a
generator or to move processing to an alternate site, considering the likelihood of losing

electrical power for various lengths of time?   Whether the strategy is on-site or off-site, a
contingency planning strategy normally consists of three parts: emergency response, recovery,

and resumption.


I   i   Emergency Response. Document the initial actions taken to protect lives and limit
        damage.


W\      Recovery.   Plan the steps that are taken to continue support for critical functions.



n       Resumption.      Determine what is required in order to return to normal operations. The

        relationship between recovery and resumption is important.      The longer it takes to

        resume normal operations, the longer the organization will have to operate in the
        recovery mode.



H       Implementation. Implement the contingency plan. Once the contingency planning

        strategies have been selected, it is necessary to make appropriate preparations, document

        the procedures, and train employees.    Many of these tasks are ongoing.


3.6.5 Test and Revise Plan

An organization should test and revise the contingency plan. A contingency plan should be
tested periodically because there will undoubtedly be flaws in the plan and its implementation.

The following items should be considered:


m       Keep Current. Responsibility for keeping the contingency plan current should be
        specifically assigned.   Update the plan since it will become outdated as time passes and
        as the resources used to support critical functions change.



H       Test. The extent and frequency of testing will vary between organizations and among

        systems.




                                                  33
                                                                                     Principles and Practices
                                                                                    for Securing IT Systems



3.7     Computer Security Incident Handling
A computer security incident can result from a computer virus, other malicious code, or a system
intruder, either an insider or an outsider.     The definition of a computer security incident is
somewhat flexible and may vary by organization and computing environment.               An incident
handling capability may be viewed as a component of contingency planning, because it provides

the ability to react quickly and efficiently to disruptions in normal processing. Incident handling

can be considered that portion of contingency planning that responds to malicious technical

threats.




3.7.1   Uses of a Capability
An organization should address computer security incidents by developing an incident handling
capability.    The incident handling capability should be used to:


H          Provide Ability to Respond Quickly and Effectively.



HI         Contain and Repair Damage From Incidents. When left unchecked, malicious
           software can significantly harm an organization's computing, depending on the

           technology and its connectivity. Containing the incident should include an assessment of

           whether the incident is part of a targeted attack on the organization or an isolated

           incident.



           Prevent Future Damage. An incident handling capability should assist an organization
           in preventing (or at least minimizing) damage from future incidents. Incidents can be

           studied internally to gain a better understanding of the organization's threats and

           vulnerabilities.



3.7.2 Characteristics

An incident handling capability should have the following characteristics:


HI         Understanding of the Constituency It Will Serve. The constituency may be external as
           well as internal.   An incident that affects an organization may also affect its trading


                                                      34
                                                                         Principles and Practices
                                                                         for Securing IT Systems



partners, contractors, or clients. In addition, an organization 's computer security

incident handling capability may be able to help other organizations and, therefore, help

protect the community as a whole.



Educated Constituency. Users need to know about, accept, and trust the incident
handling capability or it will not be used. Through training and awareness programs,

users can become knowledgeable about the existence of the capability and how to

recognize and report incidents. Users trust in the value of the service will build with

reliable performance.



Centralized Communications. Successful incident handling requires that users be able

to report incidents to the incident handling team in a convenient, straightforward fashion

without the fear of attribution.   An incident handling capability should provide a way for
users to report incidents.   A centralized communications point is very useful for accessing
or distributing information relevant to the incident handling effort. For example, if users

are linked together via a network, the incident handling capability can then use the

network to send out timely announcements and other information.


Expertise in the Requisite Technologies. The technical staff members who comprise

the incident handling capability need specific knowledge.    Technical capabilities ( e.g.,

trained personnel and virus identification software) should be prepositioned, ready to be

used as necessary.



Ability to Communicate Effectively. This includes communicating with different types

of users, who range from system administrators to unskilled users to management to law-
enforcement officials.



Links to Other Groups. Other groups assist in incident handling (as needed). The
organization should have already made important contacts, both external and internal

with other supportive sources (e.g., public affairs, legal, technical, managerial and state

and local law enforcement) to aid in containment and recovery efforts. Intruder activity,
whether hackers or malicious code, can often affect many systems located at many

                                           35
                                                                      Principles and Practices
                                                                      for Securing IT Systems



different network sites; handling the incidents can be logistically complex and can

require information from outside the organization.   By planning ahead, such contacts can
be preestablished and the speed of response improved, thereby containing and

minimizing damage.




                                        36
                                                                                 Principles and Practices
                                                                                for Securing IT Systems



3.8   Awareness and Training
An effective computer security awareness and training program requires proper planning,
implementation, maintenance, and periodic evaluation. In general, a computer security

awareness and training program should encompass the following seven steps:



       Identify Program Scope, Goals, and Objectives. The scope of the program should

       provide training to all types of people who interact with IT systems. Since users need

       training which relates directly to their use of particular systems, a large organization-

       wide program needs to be supplemented by more system-specific programs.



       Identify Training Staff.   It is important that trainers have sufficient knowledge of

       computer security issues, principles, and techniques.   It is also vital that they   know how
       to communicate information and ideas effectively.




3      Identify Target Audiences. Not everyone needs the same degree or type of computer

       security information to do their jobs.   A computer security awareness and training
       program that distinguishes between groups of people, presents only the information
       needed by the particular audience, and omits irrelevant information will have the best
       results.




       Motivate Management and Employees. To successfully implement an awareness and
       training program, it is important to gain the support of management and employees.

       Consider using motivational techniques to show management and employees how their

       participation in a computer security and awareness program will benefit the

       organization.



       Administer the Program. Several important considerations for administering the
       program include visibility, selection of appropriate training methods, topics, materials,
       and presentation techniques.




                                                 37
                                                                      Principles and Practices
                                                                      for Securing IT Systems



Maintain the Program. Efforts should be made to keep abreast of changes in computer
technology and security requirements.   A training program that meets an organization's
needs today may become ineffective when the organization starts to use a new

application or changes its environment, such as by connecting to the Internet.



Evaluate the Program. An evaluation should attempt to ascertain how much

information is retained, to what extent computer security procedures are being followed,

and general attitudes toward computer security.




                                        38
                                                                                  Principles and Practices
                                                                                 for Securing IT Systems



3.9 Security Considerations in Computer Support and Operations

Computer support and operations refers to system administration and tasks external to the system
that support its operation (e.g., maintaining documentation).     Failure to consider security as part

of the support and operations of IT systems is, for many organizations, a significant weakness.

Computer security system literature includes many examples of how organizations undermined
their often expensive security measures because of poor documentation, no control of

maintenance accounts, or other shoddy practices. The following practices are what an

organization's support and operation should include:



H      User Support. In general, system support and operations stajf should provide assistance
       to users such as with a help desk.    Support stajf need to be able to identify security

       problems, respond appropriately, and inform appropriate individuals.



       Software Support. Controls should be placed on system software commensurate with

       the risk.    The controls should include:


               policies for loading and executing new software on a system. Executing new

               software can lead to viruses, unexpected software interactions, or software that

               may subvert or bypass security controls.


                   use of powerful system utilities. System utilities can compromise the integrity of

               operating systems and logical access controls.



               authorization of system changes. This involves the protection of software and

               backup copies and can be done with a combination of logical and physical access
               controls.



               license management. Software should be properly licensed and organizations

               should take steps to ensure that no illegal software is being used. For example,

               an organization may audit systems for illegal copies of copyrighted software.




                                                   39
                                                                                        Principles and Practices
                                                                                       for Securing IT Systems



H       Configuration Management. Configuration management should ensure that changes to

        the system do not unintentionally or unknowingly diminish security.            The goal is to know
        how changes will affect system security.


I   i   Backups. It is critical to back up software and data. Frequency of backups will depend
        upon how often data changes and how important those changes are. Program managers
        should be consulted to determine what backup schedule is appropriate. Backup copies

        should be tested to ensure they are usable. Backups should be stored securely.



fill    Media Controls. A variety of measures such as marking and logging, should be used to
        provide physical and environmental protection and accountability for tapes, diskettes,

        printouts, and other media.    The extent of media control depends upon many factors,
        including the type of data, the quantity of media, and the nature of the user environment.



H       Documentation. All aspects of computer support and operations should be documented
        to ensure continuity and consistency.    Security documentation should be designed to

        fulfill the needs of the different types of people   who use   it.   The security of a system also
        needs to be documented, including security plans, contingency plans, and security

        policies and procedures.



§       Maintenance. If someone who does not normally have access to the system performs
        maintenance, then a security vulnerability is introduced. Procedures should be

        developed to ensure that only authorized personnel perform maintenance. If a system has

        a maintenance account, it is critical to change factory-set passwords or otherwise disable

        the accounts until they are needed. If maintenance is to be performed remotely,

        authentication of the maintenance provider should be made.



H       Standardized Log-on Banner. Prior to user authentication, the system should display a
        banner warning that use of the system is restricted to authorized people.




                                                   40
                                                                                    Principles and Practices
                                                                                   for Securing IT Systems



3.10 Physical and Environmental Security

Physical and environmental security controls are implemented to protect the facility housing

system resources, the system resources themselves, and the facilities used to support their
operation.      An organization's physical and environmental security program should address the
following seven topics. In doing so, it can help prevent interruptions in computer services,

physical damage, unauthorized disclosure of information, loss of control over system integrity,

and theft.



QjH     Physical Access Controls. Physical access controls restrict the entry and exit of

       personnel (and often equipment and media) from an area, such as an office building,

        suite, data center,   or room containing a local area network (LAN ) server.



                   Physical access controls should address not only the area containing system

                   hardware, but also locations of wiring used to connect elements of the system,

                   supporting services (such as electric power), backup media, and any other

                   elements required for the system's operation.



                   It is important to review the effectiveness of physical access controls in each area,

                   both during normal business hours and at other times — particularly when an

                   area may be unoccupied.



        Fire Safety Factors. Building fires are a particularly important security threat because

        of the potential for complete destruction of both hardware and data, the risk to human

        life,   and the pervasiveness of the damage. Smoke, corrosive gases, and high humidity
       from a localized fire can damage systems throughout an entire building. Consequently, it
        is important to evaluate the fire safety of buildings that house systems.




        Failure of Supporting Utilities. Systems and the people who operate them need to have

        a reasonably well-controlled operating environment. Consequently, failures of electric

        power, heating and air-conditioning systems, water, sewage, and other utilities will




                                                    41
                                                                                    Principles and Practices
                                                                                  for Securing IT Systems



        usually cause a service interruption and may damage hardware.         Organizations should

        ensure that these utilities, including their many elements, function properly.



[Hi     Structural Collapse.     Organizations should be aware that a building may be subjected

        to a load greater than it can support.   Most commonly this is a result of an earthquake, a
        snow load on the roof beyond design criteria, an explosion that displaces or cuts
        structural members, or afire that weakens structural members.




2       Plumbing Leaks. While plumbing leaks do not occur every day, they can be seriously
        disruptive.   An organization should know the location of plumbing lines that might
        endanger system hardware and take steps to reduce risk (e.g., moving hardware,
        relocating plumbing lines, and identifying shutoff valves)    .




^       Interception of Data. Depending on the type of data a system processes, there may be a

        significant risk if the data is intercepted.   Organizations should be aware that there are

        three routes of data interception: direct observation, interception of data transmission,

        and electromagnetic interception.


I   I   Mobile and Portable Systems. The analysis and management of risk usually has to be
        modified if a system is installed in a vehicle or is portable, such as a laptop computer.

        The system in a vehicle will share the risks of the vehicle, including accidents and theft,
        as well as regional and local risks.    Organizations should use:



                Secure storage of laptop computers when they are not in use.



                Encrypt data files on stored media, when cost-effective, as a precaution against

                disclosure of information if a laptop computer is lost or stolen.




                                                   42
                                                                                           Principles and Practices
                                                                                          for Securing IT Systems



3.11 Identincation and Authentication

Identification and Authentication is a critical building block of computer security since it is the

basis for most types of access control and for establishing user accountability.^ Identification

and Authentication is a technical measure that prevents unauthorized people (or unauthorized
processes) from entering an IT system. Access control usually requires that the system be able

to identify and differentiate among users.              For example, access control is often based on least

privilege, which refers to the granting to users of only those accesses minimally required to

perform their duties. User accountability requires the linking of activities on an IT system to
specific individuals and, therefore, requires the system to identify users.



3.11.1 Identification

Identification is the means by which a user provides a claimed identity to the system.               The most
common form of identification is the user ID. The following should be considered when using
user IDs:



           Unique Identiflcation. An organization should require users to identify themselves
           uniquely before being allowed to perform any actions on the system unless user

           anonymity or other factors dictate otherwise.



           Correlate Actions to Users. The system should internally maintain the identity of all

           active users and be able to link actions to specific users. (See audit trails below.)



          Maintenance of User IDs. An organization should ensure that all user IDs belong to
           currently authorized users. Identification data must be kept current by adding new users

           and deleting former users.


           Inactive User IDs. User IDs that are inactive on the system for a specific period of time

           (e.g.,   3 months) should be disabled.




  ^
      Not all types of access control require identification and authentication.


                                                              43
                                                                                   Principles and Practices
                                                                                  for Securing IT Systems



3.11.2 Authentication

Authentication is the means of establishing the validity of this claim. There are three means of

authenticating a user's identity which can be used alone or in combination: something the

individual knows (a secret ~ e.g., a password, Personal Identification Number (PIN), or

cryptographic key); something the individual possesses (a token — e.g., an      ATM card or a smart
card); and something the individual is (a biometric ~ e.g., characteristics such as a voice pattern,

handwriting dynamics, or a fingerprint). The following should be considered:



H      Require Users to Authenticate.        An organization should require users to authenticate
       their claimed identities on IT systems.   It   may be desirable for users to authenticate
       themselves with a single log-in. This requires the user to authenticate themselves only

       once and then be able to access a wide variety of applications and data available on

       local and remote systems.



D       Restrict Access to Authentication Data.         An organization should restrict access to
       authentication data. Authentication data should be protected with access controls and

       one-way encryption to prevent unauthorized individuals, including system administrators,
       or hackers from obtaining the data.



       Secure Transmission of Authentication Data. An organization should protect
       authentication data transmitted over public or shared data networks.        When
       authentication data, such as a password, is transmitted to an IT system, it can be

       electronically monitored.   This can happen on the network used to transmit the password

       or on the IT system itself. Simple encryption of a password that will be used again does

       not solve this problem because encrypting the same password will create the same

       ciphertext; the ciphertext becomes the password.



       Limit Log-on Attempts. Organizations should limit the number of log-on attempts.
       Many operating systems can be configured to lock a user ID after a set number offailed
       log-on attempts. This helps to prevent guessing of authentication data.




                                                 44
                                                                                   Principles and Practices
                                                                                  for Securing IT Systems



B        Secure Authentication Data as it is Entered. Organizations should protect
         authentication data as it is entered into the IT system, including suppressing the display

         of the password as it is entered and orienting keyboards away from view.


H        Administer Data Properly. Organizations should carefully administer authentication

         data and tokens including procedures to disable lost or stolen passwords or tokens and

         monitoring systems to look for stolen or shared accounts.



3.11.3   Passwords
If passwords are used for authentication, organizations should:




61       Specify Required Attributes. Secure password attributes such as a minimum length of

         six,   inclusion of special characters, not being in an online dictionary, and being

         unrelated to the user ID should be specified and required.



         Change Frequently. Passwords should be changed periodically.


H        Train Users. Teach users not to use easy-to-guess passwords, not to divulge their
         passwords, and not to store passwords where others can find them.



3.11.4   Advanced Authentication
Advanced authentication, such as a challenge-response system, generally requires more
administrative overhead than passwords. If used, organizations should train users in the

following:



Q        How to Use. In the use of the authentication system including secrecy ofPINs,
         passwords, or cryptographic keys, physical protection of tokens is also required.



H        Why it is Used. To help decrease possible user dissatisfaction, users should be told why
         this type of authentication is being used.




                                                    45
                                                                                      Principles and Practices
                                                                                     for Securing IT Systems



3.12 Logical Access Control

Access is the ability to do something with a computer resource (e.g., use, change, or view).
Logical access controls are the system-based means by which the ability is explicitly enabled or

restricted in some way. Logical access controls can prescribe not only who or what (e.g., in the

case of a process) is to have access to a specific system resource but also the type of access that

is permitted.




Organizations should implement logical access control based on policy made by a management

official responsible for a particular system, application, subsystem, or group of systems.          The
policy should balance the often-competing interests of security, operational requirements, and

user-friendliness. In general, organizations should base access control policy on the principle of

least privilege, which states that users should be granted access only to the resources they need

to perform their official functions.



3.12.1 Access Criteria

Organizations should control access to resources based on the following access criteria, as

appropriate:



I   I   Identity (user ID). The identity is usually unique in order to support individual

        accountability, but it can be a group identification or even anonymous.



        Roles. Access to information may also be controlled by the job assignment or function

        ( i.e.,   the role) of the user who is seeking access.   The process of defining roles should be
        based on a thorough analysis of how an organization operates and should include input

        from a wide spectrum of users in an organization.


        Location. Access to particular system resources may be based upon physical or logical

        location. Similarly, users can be restricted based upon network addresses (e.g., users

        from sites within a given organization may be permitted greater access than those from
        outside).




                                                     46
                                                                               Principles and Practices
                                                                               for Securing IT Systems



       Time. Time-of-day and day-of-week/month restrictions are another type of limitation on
       access.   For example, use of confidential personnel files may be allowed only during
       normal working hours.


       Transaction. Another criteria can be used by organizations handling transactions. For

       example, access to a particular account could be granted only for the duration of a

       transaction, e.g., in an account inquiry a caller would enter an account number and pin.

       A service representative would be given read access to that account. When completed,
       the access authorization is terminated.   This means that users have no choice in the

       accounts to which they have access.



       Service Constraints. Service constraints refer to those restrictions that depend upon the

       parameters that may arise during use of the application or that are preestablished by the
       resource owner/manager. For example, a particular software package may be licensed

       by the organization for only five users at a time. Access would be denied for a sixth user,

       even if the user were otherwise authorized to use the application. Another type of service

       constraint is based upon application content or numerical thresholds.    For example, an
       ATM machine may restrict transfers of money between accounts to certain dollar limits
       or may limit maximum ATM withdrawals to $500 per day.



       Access Modes. Organizations should consider the types of access, or access modes. The

       concept of access modes is fundamental to access control.    Common access modes, which
       can be used in both operating or application systems, include read, write, execute, and

       delete.   Other specialized access modes (more often found in applications) include create
       or search.   Of course, these criteria can be used in conjunction with one another.


3.12.2 Access Control Mechanisms

An organization should consider both internal and external access control mechanisms. Internal
access controls are a logical means of separating what defined users (or user groups) can or

cannot do with system resources. External access controls are a means of controlling

interactions between the system and outside people, systems, and services.   When setting up
access controls, organizations should consider the following mechanisms:


                                                 47
                                                                                Principles and Practices
                                                                                for Securing IT Systems



H      Access control lists (ACLs). ACLs are a register of users ( including groups, machines,

       processes) who have been given permission to use a particular system resource and the

       types of access they have been permitted.



r~l    Constrained User Interfaces. Access to specific functions are restricted by never

       allowing users to request information, functions, or other resources for which they do not

       have access. Three major types exist: menus, database views, and physically
       constrained user interface, e.g., an ATM.



H      Encryption. Encrypted information can only be decrypted, and therefore read, by those

       possessing the appropriate cryptographic key. While encryption can provide strong

       access control, it is accompanied by the need for strong key management.



H      Port Protection Devices. Fitted to a communications port of a host computer, a port

       protection device (PPD) authorizes access to the port itself often based on a separate

       authentication (such as a dial-back modem) independent of the computer's own access

       con trol functions.


H      Secure Gateways/Firewalls. Secure gateways block or filter access between two
       networks, often between a private network and a larger, more public network such as the

       Internet.   Secure gateways allow internal users to connect to external networks while

       protecting internal systems from compromise.



H      Host-Based Authentication. Host-based authentication grants access based upon the
       identity of the host originating the request, instead of the identity of the user making the

       request.    Many network applications in use today use host-based authentication to
       determine whether access is allowed. Under certain circumstances, it is fairly easy to

       masquerade as the legitimate host, especially if the masquerading host is physically
       located close to the host being impersonated.



Organizations should carefully administer access control. This includes implementing,

monitoring, modifying, testing, and terminating user accesses on the system.


                                                48
                                                                                Principles and Practices
                                                                               for Securing IT Systems



Organizations should avoid using passwords as a means of access control which can result in a

proliferation of passwords that can reduce overall security.   Password-based access control is
often inexpensive because it is already included in a large variety of applications.   However,
users may find it difficult to remember additional application passwords, which, if written down

or poorly chosen, can lead to their compromise. Password-based access controls for PC

applications are often easy to circumvent if the user has access to the operating system (and

knowledge of what to do).




                                                 49
                                                                                Principles and Practices
                                                                               for Securing IT Systems



3.13 Audit Trails

Audit trails maintain a record of system activity by system or application processes and by user

activity.   In conjunction with appropriate tools and procedures, audit trails can provide a means

to help accomplish several security-related objectives, including individual accountability,

reconstruction of events, intrusion detection, and problem identification. Audit trails should be

used for the following:



H       Individual Accountability. The audit trail supports accountability by providing a trace

        of user actions. While users cannot be prevented from using resources to which they
        have legitimate access authorization, audit trail analysis can be used to examine their
        actions.



H       Reconstruction of Events. An organization should use audit trails to support after-the-

        fact investigations of how, when, and why normal operations ceased.



HI      Intrusion Detection. If audit trails have been designed and implemented to record

        appropriate information, they can assist in intrusion detection. Intrusions can be

        detected in real time, by examining audit records as they are created or after the fact, by

        examining audit records in a batch process.



H       Problem Identification. Audit trails may also be used as online tools to help identify
        problems other than intrusions as they occur. This is often referred to as real-time
        auditing or monitoring.



3.13.1 Contents of Audit Trail Records

An audit trail should include sufficient information to establish what events occurred and who
(or what) caused them. Defining the scope and contents of the audit trail should be done

carefully to balance security needs with possible performance, privacy, or other costs. In

general, an event record should specify:




                                                  50
                                                                                Principles and Practices
                                                                                for Securing IT Systems



        Type of Event. The type of event and its result, such as failed user authentication
        attempts, changes to users' security information, and organization- and application-

        specific security-relevant events.



        When the Event Occurred. The time and day the event occurred should be listed.

        User ID Associated With the Event.


        Program or Command Used to Initiate the Event.


3.13.2 Audit Trail Security

Organizations should protect the audit trail from unauthorized access. The following

precautions should be taken:



n       Control Online Audit Logs. Access to online audit logs should be strictly controlled.


r~l     Separation of Duties. Organizations should strive for separation of duties between

       security personnel who administer the access control function and those who administer

        the audit trail.



        Protect Confidentiality. The confidentiality of audit trail information also needs to be

       protected if for example, it records personal information about users.



3.13.3 Audit Trail Reviews

Audit trails should be reviewed periodically. The following should be considered when

reviewing audit trails:



Q      Recognize Normal Activity. Reviewers should know what to look for to be effective in
       spotting unusual activity.   They need to understand what normal activity looks like.




                                                 51
                                                                                   Principles and Practices
                                                                                  for Securing IT Systems



          Contain a Search Capability. Audit trail review can be easier if the audit trail function
          can be queried by user ID, terminal ID, application name, date and time, or some other

          set of parameters to run reports of selected information.



          Follow-up Reviews.     The appropriate system-level or application-level administrator

          should review the audit trails following a known system or application software problem,

          a known violation of existing requirements by a user, or some unexplained system or user

          problem.


[is       Develop Review Guidelines. Application owners, data owners, system administrators,
          data processing function managers, and computer security managers should determine

          how much review of audit trail records is necessary, based on the importance of
          identifying unauthorized activities.



          Automated Tools. Traditionally, audit trails are analyzed in a batch mode at regular
          intervals (e.g., daily). Audit analysis tools, such as those based on audit reduction,

          attack signature, and variance techniques, can be used in a real-time, or near real-time

       fashion. Organizations should use the many types of tools that have been developed to

          help reduce the amount of information contained in audit records, as well as to distill

          useful information from the raw data.



3.13.4 Keystroke Monitoring

Keystroke monitoring is the process used to view or record both the keystrokes entered by a

computer user and the computer's response during an interactive session. Keystroke monitoring
is usually considered a special case of audit trails.   The Department of Justice has advised that an
ambiguity in U.S. law makes it unclear whether keystroke monitoring is considered equivalent to

an unauthorized telephone wiretap.      If keystroke monitoring is used in audit trails, organizations

should:



Q         Have Written Policy. A policy, in concert with appropriate legal counsel, should be
          developed.




                                                   52
                                                                             Principles and Practices
                                                                             for Securing IT Systems



I   1   Notify Users. Inform users if keystroke monitoring may take place.




                                               53
                                                                                   Principles and Practices
                                                                                   for Securing IT Systems



3.14 Cryptography

Cryptography is a branch of mathematics based on the transformation of data.         It provides an


important tool for protecting information and is used in many aspects of computer security.

Cryptography is traditionally associated only with keeping data secret. However, modern
cryptography can be used to provide many security services, such as electronic signatures and

ensuring that data has not been modified. Several important issues should be considered when

designing, implementing, and integrating cryptography in an IT system.



       Select Design and Implementation Standards.             Managers and users of IT systems
       must select among various standards when deciding to use cryptography. Their selection
       should be based on cost-effectiveness analysis, trends in the standard's acceptance, and

       interoperability requirements. In addition, each standard should be carefully analyzed to

       determine if it is applicable to the organization and the desired application.



       Decide on Hardware vs. Software Implementations. The trade-offs among security,

       cost, simplicity, efficiency, and ease of implementation need to be studied by managers

       acquiring various security products. Cryptography can be implemented in either

       hardware or software; each has related costs and benefits.


       Manage Keys.       All keys need to be protected against modification, and secret keys and

       private keys need protection against unauthorized disclosure.       Key management involves
       the procedures and protocols, both manual and automated, used throughout the entire

       life cycle of the keys.   This includes the generation, distribution, storage, entry, use,

       destruction, and archiving of cryptographic keys.



       Secure Cryptographic Modules. The proper functioning of cryptography requires the
       secure design, implementation, and use of the cryptographic module. This includes

       protecting the module against tampering.         Cryptography is typically implemented in a
       module of software, firmware, hardware, or some combination thereof. This module
       contains the cryptographic algorithm(s), certain control parameters, and temporary

       storage facilities for the key(s) being used by the algorithm(s).




                                                   54
                                                                      Principles and Practices
                                                                     for Securing IT Systems



Comply with Export Rules. Users must be aware that the U.S. Government controls
the export of cryptographic implementations.   The rules governing export can be quite
complex, since they consider multiple factors. In addition, cryptography is a rapidly

changing field, and rules may change from time to time. Questions concerning the export

of a particular implementation should be addressed to appropriate legal counsel.




                                        55
                                                                                Principles and Practices
                                                                               for Securing IT Systems



4.   References
British Standards Institution. British Standard 7799, A Code of Practice for Information

Security.   1995


Datapro. The Quest for Generally Accepted System Security Principles ( GSSP). Delran NJ,

October 1994


National Institute of Standards and Technology.       An Introduction to Computer Security: The
NIST Handbook.     Special Publication 800-12.    1995.



National Institute of Standards and Technology.    Minimum Security Requirements for Multi-
User Operating Systems. NISTIR5153. March 1993.


National Research Council. Computers at Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age.

Washington, DC, National Academy Press, 1991


Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development. Guidelines for the Security of

Information Systems. Paris, 1992



Privacy Working Group, Information Policy Committee, Information Infrastructure Task Force.

Privacy and the National Information Infrastructure: Principles for Providing and Using

Personal Information. June 6, 1995




                                                 56
            ANNOUNCEMENT OF NEW PUBLICATIONS ON
                    COMPUTER SECURITY




Superintendent of Documents
Government Printing Office
Washington, DC 20402



Dear Sir:

  Please add my name to the announcement list of new publications to be issued in
the series: National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-.


Name

Company

Address

City                            State                      Zip Code




(Notification key N-503)
    !|




'I




         1




         i




         I




    i.




i


I




1^
                                    Technical Publications
Periodical

                                                                                     —
Journal of Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Reports NIST research
and development in those disciplines of the physical and engineering sciences in which the Institute is
active. These include physics, chemistry, engineering, mathematics, and computer sciences. Papers cover a
broad range of subjects, with major emphasis on measurement methodology and the basic technology
underlying standardization. Also included from time to time are survey articles on topics closely related to
the Institute's technical and scientific programs. Issued six times a year.




Nonperiodicals

Monographs  —Major                                        on
                         contributions to the technical literature     various subjects related to the
                    and
Institute's scientific     technical activities.
Handbooks—Recommended codes of engineering and              industrial practice (including safety
                                                                                     codes)               devel-
oped  incooperation with                                             and
                            interested industries, professional organizations,      regulatory bodies.
Special Publications—Include proceedings of conferences sponsored by NIST, NIST annual               reports, and
other special publications appropriate to this grouping such as wall charts, pocket cards, and bibliographies.

                                                   —
National Standard Reference Data Series Provides quantitative data on the physical and chemical
properties of materials, compiled from the world's literature and critically evaluated. Developed under a
worldwide program coordinated by NIST under the authority of the National Standard Data Act (Public
Law 90-396). NOTE: The Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data (JPCRD) is published
bimonthly for NIST by the American Chemical Society (ACS) and the American Institute of Physics (AIP).
Subscriptions, reprints, and supplements are available from ACS, 1155 Sixteenth St., NW, Washington, DC
20056.
                           —
Building Science Series Disseminates technical information developed at the Institute on building
materials, components, systems, and whole structures. The series presents research results, test methods, and
performance criteria related to the structural and environmental functions and the durability and safety
characteristics of building elements and systems.

Technical Notes   —   Studies or reports which are complete in themselves but restrictive in their treatment of
a subject. Analogous to monographs but not so comprehensive in scope or definitive in treatment of the
subject area. Often serve as a vehicle for final reports of work performed at NIST under the sponsorship of
other government agencies.
Voluntary Product Standards       —Developed under procedures        published by the Department of Commerce
in Part 10, Title 15, of the Code of Federal Regulations. The standards establish nationally recognized
requirements for products, and provide all concerned interests with a basis for common understanding of
the characteristics of the products. NIST administers this program in support of the efforts of private-sector
standardizing organizations.

Order the following NIST publications     —FIPS and NISTIRs—from the National Technical Information
Service, Springfield, VA 22161.
                                                                              —
Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUB) Publications in this series
collectively constitute the Federal Information Processing Standards Register. The Register serves as the
official source of information in the Federal Government regarding standards issued by NIST pursuant to
the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended. Public Law 89-306 (79 Stat.
1127), and as implemented by Executive Order 11717 (38 FR 12315, dated May 11, 1973) and Part 6 of
Title 15   CFR (Code of Federal Regulations).
NIST Interagency Reports (NISTIR)—A special series of interim or final reports on work performed by
NIST for outside sponsors (both government and nongovernment). In general, initial distribution is handled
by the sponsor; public distribution is by the National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA 22161,
in paper copy or microfiche form.
<u
E            o
             o
E    ard
             o
o T3          I



             ON
U C          OS
             00
o
     iS      o
c o
E 3
           — £f
                  oa


     O H j=       o
 .
    -'5 T3
32 5O
