                       Archived NIST Technical Series Publication
The attached publication has been archived (withdrawn), and is provided solely for historical purposes.
It may have been superseded by another publication (indicated below).

Archived Publication
Series/Number:            NIST Special Publication 800-29
Title:
                           A Comparison of the Security Requirements for Cryptographic
                           Modules in FIPS 140-1 and FIPS 140-2
Publication Date(s):      June 2001
Withdrawal Date:          September 26, 2018
Withdrawal Note:
                           SP 800-29 is withdrawn in its entirety, and is not being
                           superseded.


Superseding Publication(s)
The attached publication has been superseded by the following publication(s):

Series/Number:
Title:


Author(s):


Publication Date(s):
URL/DOI:


Additional Information (if applicable)
Contact:                 Computer Security Division (Information Technology Laboratory)
Latest revision of the
attached publication:
Related information:
                         https://csrc.nist.gov/projects/cmvp
                         https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/fips/140/2/final
Withdrawal
                         N/A
announcement (link):




Date updated: September 26, 2018
          NIST Special Publication 800-29   A Comparison of the Security
                                            Requirements for
                                            Cryptographic Modules in
          Nisr                              FIPS 140-1 and FIPS 140-2
          National Institute of Standards
          and Technology
          Technology Administration
          U.S. Department of Commerce       Ray Snouffer, Annabelle Lee, and Arch Oldehoeft




                  COMPUTER                                 SECURITY




    QC
    100
".U57
_   NO. 800-29
rhe          National Institute of Standards and Technology was established in 1988 by Congress to "assist industry in
         the development of technology     .   .   .   needed to improve product quality, to modernize manufacturing processes,
to ensure product reliability . . . and to facilitate rapid commercialization ... of products based on new scientific
discoveries."
        NIST, originally founded as the National Bureau of Standards in 1901, works to strengthen U.S. industry's
competitiveness; advance science and engineering; and improve public health, safety, and the environment. One
of the agency's basic functions is to develop, maintain, and retain custody of the national standards of
measurement, and provide the means and methods for comparing standards used in science, engineering,
manufacturing, commerce, industry, and education with the standards adopted or recognized by the Federal
Government.
        As an agency of the U.S. Commerce Department's Technology Administration, NIST conducts basic and
applied research in the physical sciences and engineering, and develops measurement techniques, test
methods, standards, and related services. The Institute does generic and precompetitive work on new and
advanced technologies. NIST's research facilities are located at Gaithersburg,                   MD 20899, and at Boulder, CO 80303.
Major technical operating units and their principal activities are listed below. For more information contact the
Publications and Program Inquiries Desk, 301-975-3058.


Office of the Director                                                     Chemical Science and Technology
•   National Quality Program                                               Laboratory
•   International and Academic Affairs                                     •   Biotechnology
                                                                           •   Physical and Chemical Properties^
Technology Services                                                        •   Analytical Chemistry
•   Standards Services                                                     •   Process Measurements
•   Technology Partnerships                                                •   Surface and Microanalysis Science
•   Measurement Services
•   Information Services                                                   Physics Laboratory
                                                                           •   Electron and Optical Physics

Advanced Technology Program                                                •   Atomic Physics
•   Economic Assessment                                                    •   Optical Technology

•   Information Technology and Applications
                                                                           •   Ionizing Radiation

•   Chemistry and Life Sciences
                                                                           • Time and Frequency'
                                                                           • Quantum Physics'
•   Materials and Manufacturing Technology
•   Electronics and Photonics Technology
                                                                           Manufacturing Engineering
                                                                           Laboratory
Manufacturing Extension Partnership                                        •   Precision Engineering
Program                                                                    •   Manufacturing Metrology
•   Regional Programs
                                                                           •   Intelligent   Systems
•   National Programs
                                                                           •   Fabrication Technology
•   Program Development
                                                                           •   Manufacturing Systems Integration

Electronics and Electrical Engineering                                     Building and Fire Research
Laboratory                                                                 Laboratory
•   Microelectronics                                                       •   Applied Economics
•   Law Enforcement Standards                                              •   Structures
•   Electricity                                                            •   Building Materials
•   Semiconductor Electronics                                              •   Building Environment
•   Radio-Frequency Technology'                                            •   Fire Safety Engineering
•   Electromagnetic Technology'                                            •   Fire Science
•   Optoelectronics'
                                                                           Information Technology Laboratory
Materials Science and Engineering                                          •   Mathematical and Computational Sciences^
Laboratory                                                                 •   Advanced Network Technologies
•   Intelligent Processing of Materials                                    •   Computer Security
•   Ceramics                                                               •   Information Access
•   Materials Reliability'                                                 •   Convergent Information Systems
•   Polymers                                                               •   Information Services and Computing
•   Metallurgy                                                             •   Software Diagnostics and Conformance Testing
•   NIST Center for Neutron Research                                       •   Statistical   Engineering


'At Boulder, CO 80303.
^Some elements at Boulder, CO.
NIST Special Publication 800-29   A Comparison of the Security
                                  Requirements for
                                  Cryptographic Modules in
                                  FIPS 140-1 and FTPS 140-2

                                  Ray Snouffer, Annabelle Lee, and Arch Oldehoeft




        COMPUTER                                          SECURITY
                                  Computer Security Division
                                  Information Technology Laboratory
                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                  Gaithersburg,  MD   20899-8930




                                  June 2001




                                  U.S. Department of Commerce
                                  Donald L. Evans, Secretary
                                  Technology Administration
                                  Karen H. Brown, Acting Under Secretary of Commerce for Technology

                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                  Karen H. Brown, Acting Director
                                Reports on Information Security Technology

    The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical leadership for the Nation's measurement and
standards infrastructure for information technology. ITL develops tests, test methods, reference data, proof of concept
implementations and technical analyses to advance the development and productive use of information technology.
ITL's responsibilities include the development of technical, physical, administrative, and management standards and
guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive unclassified information in federal computer systems.
This Special Publication 800 series reports on ITL's research, guidance, and outreach efforts in computer security, and
its   collaborative activities with industry, government, and academic organizations.




             National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication 800-29
                Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. Spec. Publ. 800-29, 30 pages (June 2001)
                                                 CODEN: NSPUE2




                                 U.S.   GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
                                               WASHINGTON: 2001

                    For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office
                    Internet: bookstore.gpo.gov  — Phone: (202) 5 1 2- 1 800 —
                                                                             Fax: (202) 5 1 2-2250
                                     Mail Stop SSOP, Washington, DC 20402-0001
                                                                           FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



                                         TABLE OF CONTENTS



1.     THE CRYPTOGRAPHIC MODULE VALIDATION PROGRAM AND FIPS 140-2                                1

2.     SUMMARY OF DIFFERENCES BETWEEN FIPS 140-1 AND FIPS 140-2                                  3
     2.1.       Security Requirements                                                            4
       2.1 .1   .   Cryptograpliic Module Specification                                          4
       2.1 .2.      Cryptograpliic Module Ports and Interfaces                                   4
       2.1.3.       Roles, Services, and Authentication                                          4
       2.1.4.       Finite State Model                                                           4
       2.1.5.       Pliysical Security                                                           5
       2.1.6.       Operational Environment                                                      5
       2.1.7.       Cryptographic Key Management                                                 5
       2.1 .8.      Electromagnetic Interference/ Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMI/EMC)        5
       2.1.9.       Self-Tests                                                                   6
       2.1.10.      Design Assurance                                                             6
       2.1.11.      Mitigation of Other Attacks                                                  6
       2.1.12.      Appendixes                                                                   7
3.     DETAILED DIFFERENCES BETWEEN FIPS 140-1 AND FIPS 140-2                                    8
     3.1.      Documentation Requirements                                                        8
     3.2.      Noteworthy Differences in Terminology                                             8
     3.3.      Differences in Specific Security Requirement Areas                                8
        3.3. 1  .  Cryptographic Module Specification                                            8
        3.3.2.     Cryptographic Module Ports and Interfaces                                    10
        3.3.3.     Roles, Services, and Authentication                                          11
        3.3.4.     Finite State Model                                                           12
       3.3.5.       Physical Security                                                           13
       3.3.6.       Operational Environment                                                     13
       3.3.7.       Cryptographic Key Management                                                18
       3.3.8.       Electromagnetic Interference/Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMI/EMC)        20
       3.3.9.       Self-Tests                                                                  21
       3.3.10.      Design Assurance                                                            23
       3.3.11.      Mitigation of Other Attacl<s                                                25
4.     DIFFERENCES IN APPENDIXES                                                                26
5.     ANNEXES TO THE STANDARD                                                                  27
                                                                           FIPS 140-1&2 Differences




   1.   THE CRYPTOGRAPHIC MODULE VALIDATION PROGRAM
                                         AND FIPS 140-2
Federal agencies, industry, and tlie public now rely on cryptography to protect information and
communications used in critical infrastructures, electronic commerce, and other application areas.
Cryptographic modules are implemented in these products and systems to provide cryptographic
services such as confidentiality, integrity, non-repudiation and identification and authentication.
Adequate testing and validation of the cryptographic module against established standards is
essential for security assurance. Both Federal agencies and the public benefit from the use of
tested and validated products. Without adequate testing, weaknesses such as poor design, weak
algorithms, or incorrect implementation of the cryptographic module, can result in insecure
products.


On July 17, 1995, NIST established the Cryptographic Module Validation Program (CMVP) that
validates cryptographic modules to Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) 140-1
Security Requirements for Cryptographic Modules, and other FIPS cryptography based
standards. The CMVP is a joint effort between NIST and the Communications Security
Establishment (CSE) of the Government of Canada. Products validated as conforming to FIPS
140-1 are accepted by the Federal agencies of both countries for the protection of sensitive
information. Vendors of cryptographic modules use independent, accredited testing laboratories
to test their modules. NIST's Computer Security Division and CSE jointly serve as the validation
authorities for the program, validating the test results. Currently, there are several National
Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program (NVLAP) accredited laboratories that perform FIPS
140-1 compliance testing. These labs are listed at the web site: http://csrc.nist.gov/cryptval.   As
of January 2001  over 150 cryptographic modules from more than forty separate vendors have
been validated through the program. The number of validated modules has nearly doubled each
year of the program's existence.

The underlying philosophy of the CMVP is that the user community needs strong independently
tested and commercially available cryptographic products. The CMVP must also work with the
commercial sector and the cryptographic community to achieve security, interoperability and
assurance. Directly associated with this philosophy is the goal of the CMVP to promote the use
of validated products and provide Federal agencies with a security metric to use in procuring
cryptographic modules. The testing performed by accredited laboratories provides this metric.
Federal agencies, industry, and the public can choose products from the CMVP Validated
Modules List and have confidence that the products meet the claimed level of security. The
program validates a wide variety of modules including general encryption products, secure radios,
Virtual Private Network (VPN) devices, Internet browsers, cryptographic tokens and modules that
support Public Key Infrastructure (PKI). Currently, validation services are provided for FIPS 140-1
& 2, the Data Encryption Standard (DES and Triple DES), the Digital Signature Standard, the
Secure Hash Standard, and the Skipjack Algorithm.

The CMVP offers a documented methodology for conformance testing through a defined set of
security requirements in FIPS 140-1&2 and other cryptographic standards. NIST developed the
standard and an associated metric (the Derived Test Requirements for FIPS 140-1) to ensure
repeatability of tests and equivalency in results across the testing laboratories. The five
commercial laboratories provide vendors of cryptographic modules a choice of testing facilities
and promotes healthy competition. (Note, there is no limit to the number of testing laboratories,
and additional testing laboratories may be added to the program.)

A government and industry working group composed of both users and vendors developed FIPS
140-1. The working group identified eleven areas of security requirements with four increasing
levels of security for cryptographic modules. The security levels allow for a wide spectrum of data
sensitivity (e.g., low value administrative data, million dollar funds transfers, and health data), and




                                                   1
                                                                             FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



a diversity of application environnnents (e.g., a guarded facility, an office, and a completely
unprotected location). Each security level offers an increase in security over the preceding level.
These four security levels allow cost-effective solutions that are appropriate for different degrees
of data sensitivity and different application environments.    This structure also allows great
flexibility   when specifying or identifying users needs. Modules may meet different levels in the
security requirements areas (e.g., a module meets level 2 overall, level 3 physical security with
additional level 4 requirements).    The Validated Modules list now contains modules representing
all four security    levels.


FIPS 140-1&2 define a framework and methodology for NIST's current and future cryptographic
standards. The standard provides users with:


      •   a specification of security features that are required at each of four security levels;
      •   flexibility in choosing security requirements;

      •   a guide to ensuring the cryptographic modules incorporate necessary security features;
          and
      •   the assurance that the modules are compliant with cryptography based standards.


The Secretary of Commerce has made FIPS 140-1 mandatory and binding for U.S. Federal
agencies and organizations. The standard is specifically applicable when a Federal agency
determines that cryptography is necessary for protecting sensitive information. The standard is
used in designing and implementing cryptographic modules that Federal departments and
agencies operate or are operated for them. FIPS 140-1 is applicable if the module is
incorporated in a product, application or functions as a standalone device.


From the beginning, the CMVP has been dynamic with a constant reexamination of the
underlying standard, test methodology, reporting structure, and associated documentation. In
addition, questions from the vendor and user communities have provided valuable input and an
implementation perspective. NIST and CSE have continually kept pace with new security
methods, changes in technology, and required interpretations of the standard by issuing official
Implementation Guidance and Policy ior FIPS 140-1 and associated Derived Test Requirements
(DTR). The Implementation Guidance covers program policy, technical questions, and general
guidance needed for module validation.

In addition to constant reexamination, the standard is officially reexamined and       reaffirmed every
five years.            1998, FIPS 140-1 entered a regularly scheduled 5-year review to
                In the fall of
consider new and/or revised requirements needed to meet technological and economic change.
A request for comments on FIPS 140-1 was published on October 23, 1998 in the Federal
Register. The official comment period for the request closed January 21      ,   1999. A revised draft
standard was produced based on the public comments received, previously issued
implementation guidance and a "line by line" review by the NIST, CSE, and testing laboratory
staff.A second request for comments on the resulting FIPS 140-2 draft was published on
November 17, 1999 in the Federal Register with a closing date of February 15, 2000. In
December 2000, the FIPS 140-1 update to FIPS 140-2 was completed. The implementation
schedule for FIPS 140-2 begins with the approval date or date of signature. The effective date is
six months after the approval date and marks the beginning of a six month transition period. This
transition period enables agencies to develop acquisition plans for procuring FIPS 140-2
compliant modules. At the end of the transition period, modules will no longer be tested against
FIPS 140-1. (Note: all FIPS 140-1 testing labs will become FIPS 140-2 testing labs.) However,
FIPS 140-1 validated modules may continue to be procured. This paper gives an overview of the
substantive differences between FIPS 140-1 and FIPS 140-2.


Section 2 of this document provides a summary analysis of the changes between FIPS 140-1 and
140-2. Section 3 of this document includes the specific requirements documented in FIPS 140-2
and the previous versions specified in FIPS 140-1. The FIPS 140-2 requirements are displayed
in   a box for easy reference.



                                                     2
                                                                                     FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



2.   SUMMARY OF DIFFERENCES BETWEEN FIPS 140-1 AND FIPS
                                                   140-2

FIPS 140-1 is one of NIST's most successful standards and forms the very foundation of the
CMVP. FIPS 140-1 is widely recognized as the "defacto" standard for cryptographic modules and
is referenced and/or used in its entirety by     numerous standards bodies and international testing
organizations. Therefore, great care was given to the update process beginning with a complete
"line by line" review and examination of the standard and all Implementation Guidance issued
during FIPS 140-1's initial five years.The underlying question asked by the authors of FIPS 140-
2 was "how does one improve a successful and proven standard?" The answer was simple -
include lessons learned from questions and comments, reflect changes in technology, and
strengthen the standard, but do not change the focus or emphasis. The authors also took the
opportunity to improve the format of the standard by minimally restructuring the content (see the
table below), standardizing the language and terminology to add clarity and consistency,
removing redundant and extraneous information to make the standard more concise, and revising
or removing vague requirements. Looking to the future, the authors added a section detailing
new types of attacks on cryptographic modules that currently do not have specific testing
available. The end result is a stronger, more concise, and readable standard that still embodies
the spirit of the original standard.




                                               Tables of Content
                          FIPS 140-1                                                FIPS 140-2
      1.   Overview                                          1.   Overview
     2.  Glossary of Terms and Acronyms                      2.   Glossary of Terms and Acronyms*
     3.  Functional Security Requirements                    3.   Functional Security Requirements
     4. Security Requirements                                4.   Security Requirements
       4.1   Cryptographic Modules                            4.1     Cryptographic Module Specification*
       4.2       Cryptographic Module Interfaces              4.2     Cryptographic Module Ports and
                                                             Interfaces
       4.3       Roles and Services                           4.3     Roles, Services, and Authentication*

       4.4       Finite State Machine Model                   4.4     Finite State Model
       4.5       Physical Security                            4.5     Physical Security*
       4.6       Software Security                            4.6     Operational Environment*
       4.7       Operating System Security                    4.7     Cryptographic Key Management
       4.8       Cryptographic Key Management                 4.8     EMI/EMC
       4.9       Cryptographic Algorithms                     4.9     Self-Tests*
       4.10      EMI/EMC                                      4.10 Design Assurance*
       4.11      Self-Tests                                   4.1 1   Mitigation of Other Attacks*
     Appendixes                                              Appendixes
     A:    Summary of Documentation                          A:   Summary of Documentation
      Requirements                                           Requirements
      B:       Recommended Software Development              B: Recommended Software Development
       Practices                                             Practices*
      C: Selected References                                 C: Cryptographic Module Security Policy*
                                                              D: Selected Bibliography*
           *   Section added or significantly revised.




                                                         3
                                                                          FIPS 140-1&2 Differences


The following provides a brief discussion of each of the requirements areas and summary of the
major changes.

2.1.       Security Requirements

This section summarizes the changes from FIPS 140-1 to FIPS 140-2.


2.1 .1 .   Cryptographic IVtodule Specification


This section defines those requirements for identifying and establishing the cryptographic
boundary of the module. This includes the specification of the hardware, software, and/or
firmware; the module interfaces; manual or logical controls; identification of the implemented
algorithms and modes of operation; and the module's security policy.


The primary modification to this section is the inclusion of the approved cryptographic algorithms
and security functions. FIPS 140-1 separated the algorithm identification into a short standalone
section. However, given that the cryptographic algorithm is the basis of the module, inclusion of
the algorithm specification in the first section of FIPS 140-2 was a logical restructuring.


2.1.2.     Cryptographic IVIodule Ports and Interfaces

This section defines the requirements used to restrict information flow and physical access to the
logical interfaces for all entry and exit points both internal and external to the module. The
standard defines four specific logical interfaces including data input, data output, control input,
and status output, and the associated requirements by security level.

The major change in this section involves the underlying requirement for plaintext input/output
(I/O) to be separated from other types of I/O. FIPS 140-1 met this requirement by specifying the
use of physically separate ports beginning at security level 3 for plaintext I/O. Due to changes in
technology (e.g., timing separation, dedicated threads, multiplexing, etc.), the standard now
allows both physically separate ports and logical separation within existing physical ports via
trusted path.


2.1.3.     Roles, Services, and Authentication


This section is divided into three subsections covering the requirements for the authorized
operator roles; services, functions and operations provided by the module; and the authentication
needed to obtain these services.

The major modification to this section is the addition of strength of mechanism requirements for
authentication. This represents a strengthening of the standard and the first time the concept of
strength of mechanism has been specified.    These new requirements address minimum
probabilities for guessing authentication data (e.g., pins, passwords, etc.), false acceptance error
rates and restrictions placed on the feedback of authentication data to the user.


2.1.4.     Finite State Model


This section specifies the underlying design requirements for the identification and specification of
the module's operational and error states and associated transitions between states. The name
of this section was changed from Finite State Machine (FSM) to Finite State Model to more
accurately reflect the requirements. FIPS 140-1 mandated the use of an FSM Model in the
module's design. The FSM is often associated with hardware design and development. To better
represent both hardware and software modules, this section now includes the concept of utilizing
a Finite State Model or an equivalent design methodology.




                                                  4
                                                                         FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



2.1.5.   Physical Security


This section details all of the requirements surrounding the physical security of the cryptographic
module. Cryptographic modules are separated into three different embodiment categories: single
chip, multi-chip embedded, and multi-chip standalone.


The majority of changes to this section involve a re-organization of the sub-sections that define
the requirements for the three different module embodiments. FIPS 140-1 was structured with a
separate section of requirements for each of three module embodiments, plus a subsection
detailing the Environmental Failure Protection (EFP)/Environmental Failure Testing (EFT)
requirements for security level 4. For consistency and clarity, FIPS 140-2 moves all of the
redundant requirements from the three embodiments into a general section defining requirements
applicable to all. The requirements that are unique to each of the embodiments follow the
general section concluding with EFP/EFT. In addition to the restructuring, new requirements
were added for single chip and multi-chip embedded modules to allow the use of physical
enclosures for the protection of the module.

2.1.6.   Operational Environment


This section details the requirement specific to modules where an operator can load and execute
software or firmware that was not included as part of the module validation. An example of a
cryptographic module for which the operational environment requirements apply is a general-
purpose computer running cryptographic software as well as untrusted user-supplied software
(e.g., a spreadsheet or word processing program).    In this case, the hardware,   operating system,
and cryptographic software are considered part of the module. FIPS 140-2 relies on an evaluated
operating system to mitigate part of the security concerns over "Trojan Horse" attacks, where the
user-supplied software or firmware can access, obtain, or corrupt the module's critical security
parameters (e.g., cryptographic keys, passwords, etc.).

The major modification to this section was the replacement of criteria for evaluating operating
systems. FIPS 140-1 required evaluated operating systems that referenced the Trusted
Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC) classes C2, B1 and B2. The TCSEC is no longer
in use and has been replaced by the Common Criteria. Consequently, FIPS 140-2 now

references the Common Criteria for Information Technology Security Evaluation (CC), ISO/IEC
15408:1999.

2.1.7.   Cryptographic Key IVlanagement


This section contains the security requirements for cryptographic key management that
encompasses the entire lifecycle of the cryptographic keys used by a cryptographic module. This
includes random number generation, key generation, establishment, entry/output, storage, and
zeroization.   The requirements are applicable to modules that implement secret key and/or public
key algorithms.

The major modification to this section was the addition of requirements for Over-The-Air-
Rekeying (OTAR) for radio communication modules. Other modifications included: clarification of
the deterministic and nondeterministic random number generators (RNGs) sub-section to allow
RNGs approved for classified processing for use in key generation; addition of strength of
mechanism requirements in the Key Establishment subsection; and the deletion of the Key
Archive sub-section.

2.1.8.   Electromagnetic Interference/ Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMI/EMC)


This section specifies the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) requirements applicable
to cryptographic modules. These requirements are specific to the module's ability to operate in a




                                                 5
                                                                          FIPS 140-1&2 Differences


manner that does not interfere electromagnetically witli other devices. Requirements necessary
to mitigate cryptographic attacl<s based on electromagnetic emanations (TEMPEST) are not
included in this section. The Mitigation of Other Attacks section of the standard contains the
requirements related to TEMPEST attacks.

During the update process, the EMI/EMC section was modified to reflect minor changes in FCC
requirements and references.

2.1.9.    Self-Tests


This section provides the requirements necessary to ensure that the module is functioning
properly. Self-testing is required at both module power-up and when specific conditions are met.
These tests include public/private key generation, software/firmware loading, manual key entry,
random number generation, and cryptographic bypass (plaintext in, plaintext out).

The update to the standard resulted in no dramatic change in scope or format for self-test
requirements; however, previously issued guidance was included. The major changes in the
Self-Test section were strengthening the required tests and better addressing the bypass mode of
operation.    To strengthen the requirements, the new standard now mandates all four statistical
random number generator tests. FIPS 140-1 only required one of the four. Further, the statistical
limits for passing these tests were tightened to provided additional assurance for random number
generation. Public comments recommended that the Self-Test section better address modules
(i.e., routers) that are designed to automatically switch between bypass and secure mode

(plaintext in, ciphertext out). This was accomplished by including requirements specific to the
secure operation of the module during the switch between modes. These new requirements
facilitate the underlying requirement of fail-secure, where plaintext information is not released
inadvertently. In addition, FIPS 140-1 tested bypass capabilities only at module power-up. The
new standard moves bypass to the conditional testing area.

2.1.10.   Design Assurance

The Design Assurance section, which was formerly Software Security in FIPS 140-1, defines the
requirements for configuration management, delivery and operation, development and guidance
documents. The intent of this section is to provide security assurance from design and
development of the module through delivery and initial start-up.

Originally this section only specified requirements for software, but to provide greater security
assurance the section has now been expanded to address software, hardware, and firmware.
Though the entire section was re-written, the consolidated design assurance requirements found
in FIPS 140-1 forms the base. These requirements included reviews of source code, functional

specifications, and formal modeling. Requirements new to the standard include configuration
management, correct delivery and start-up, and mandatory guidance documents for users and
cryptographic officers.


2.1.11. Mitigation of Other Attacks


This section is the first new section of the standard and provides information, recommendations,
and requirements for several new types of cryptographic attacks. Susceptibility to these attacks
depends on module type, implementation, and implementation environment. These attacks are
of particular concern for cryptographic modules implemented in hostile environments or where the
attackers may be the users of the module. Generally, these types of attacks rely on the analysis
of information obtained from sources physically external to the module. In all cases, the attacks
attempt to determine some knowledge about the cryptographic keys and critical security
parameters (CSPs) contained in the module. This section was developed as a direct result of
numerous public comments recommending that power analysis, timing analysis, fault induction,



                                                  6
                                                                         FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



and TEMPEST attacks be addressed by FIPS 140-2. Certain types of cryptograpliic modules
may be susceptible to these attacks (e.g., tests for power analysis, timing analysis, and fault
induction), but testable security requirements were not available at the time this standard was
issued or the attacks were outside of the scope of the standard (e.g., TEMPEST attacks). The
new standard specifies that a cryptographic module is designed to mitigate one or more specific
                             if


attacks, then the module's security policy shall specify the security mechanisms employed by the
cryptographic module to mitigate the attack(s). The existence of these mechanisms and their
proper functioning will be validated when requirements and associated tests are developed. Brief
summaries of currently known attacks are provided in the standard.

2.1.12.   Appendixes

FIPS 140-1 contains three appendixes. A, B, and D below. Appendix C has been added to FIPS
140-2.


A.   Summary of Documentation Requirements

This section was updated to reflect modifications in the standard.

B.   Recommended Software Development Practices

This section was updated to reflect current practices.

C.   Security Policy

Appendix C specifies the information and structure of the required cryptographic module security
policy. This document is available by request and often provides the only information users have
access to prior to purchasing the module. FIPS 140-1 required a security policy, which contained
the security rules of the module. However, no format or specific content requirements were
mandated. Therefore cryptographic module security policies submitted by vendors often varied
greatly in detail and quality. FIPS 140-2 mandates more stringent requirements for both the
contents of a security policy and the structure. The vendors now must provide information
concerning the identification and authentication, access control, and physical security
mechanisms, and any mechanisms implemented for mitigation of other attacks. Two types of
security policies may exist. A proprietary security policy used by the testing laboratory to perform
necessary tests and a required non-proprietary version, which is available to public release.

D.   Selected Bibliography

This section was updated to reflect current standards and documents.




                                                 7
                                                                                   FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



       3.     DETAILED DIFFERENCES BETWEEN FIPS 140-1 AND FIPS
                                                          140-2

    This section summarizes the documentation and terminology changes and lists the specific
    requirements changes by section of FIPS 140-2.

    3.1.       Documentation Requirements

    In all security requirement areas, FIPS 140-2 explicitly specifies requirements for documentation

    by the vendor of a cryptographic module. Some of these documentation requirements are implicit
    in FIPS 140-1 (being made explicit by requirements for conformance testing). In this comparison,

    differences are noted only for those cases where FIPS 140-2 requires documentation that is new
    or is a notable extension of the requirements in FIPS 140-1.


    3.2.       Noteworthy Differences in Terminology

    Changes have been made to the terminology so that the Standard may be easily adapted by
    other standards bodies.      In particular, in FIPS   140-2, the terms "Approved" (used only in
    capitalized form) and "Approved security functions" are adopted in place of the corresponding
    FIPS 140-1 terms "Fl PS-Approved" and "FIPS approved security method."

    The supporting FIPS 140-2 definitions are:

           Approved FIPS-Approved and/or NIST-recommended.

           Approved security function: for this standard, a security function (e.g., cryptographic
           algorithm, cryptographic key management technique, or authentication technique) that is
           either
               (a)   specified in an Approved standard,
               (b)   adopted in an Approved standard and specified either in an appendix of the
                     Approved standard or in a document referenced by the Approved standard, or
               (c)   specified in the list of Approved security functions.


    Other standards bodies need only to re-define "Approved", without having to make significant
    changes to the body of the standard.


i
    FIPS 140-2 is explicit In stating that for purpose of validation a cryptographic module is required       1




I
    to implement at least one Approved security function used in an Approved mode of operation: a             ;




I   mode of the cryptographic module that employs only Approved security functions (not to be                 i




I
    confused with a s_pecif[c niode o^A'^ Approved security function, _ej^,_D_ES_C_BC m^                      |


    (Other algorithms or security functions may also "be included for use in non-Approved modes of
    operation in a cryptographic module but will not be tested in the validation process.)

    3.3.       Differences in Specific Security Requirement Areas

    This section lists the specific requirements included in FIPS 140-1 and the associated revised (or
    new) requirements included in FIPS 140-2. (Note: the format of the FIPS 140-2 requirements
    included in this document may vary from the standard for ease of reviewing.)


    3.3.1.     Cryptographic IVIodule Specification

    The area has been renamed (from Cryptographic Modules in FIPS 140-1 to Cryptographic
    Module Specification in FIPS 140-2) to more accurately reflect the content of the material.




                                                           8
                                                                                    FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



The FIPS 140-1 definition of cryptographic module:

      (Levels 1,2,3, and 4) "A cryptographic module shall be a set of hardware, software,
      firmware, or some combination thereof, that implements cryptographic logic or processes."


has been clarified in FIPS 140-2:


  i
      (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) " A cryptographic module shall be a set of hardware, software,
                  ,                                                                                            i




  1
      firmware, or some combination thereof that implements cryptographic functions or processes,              \




  i
      including cryptographic algorithms and, optionally, l<ey generation, and is contained within a           j




  I   4®t'Q®5' ^^P^'^W^P^}pP?^'^P^'^."                      _                 _ _           _        _         i




The FIPS 140-1 definition of a cryptographic boundary:

      (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "If a cryptographic module contains software or firmware, the
      cryptographic boundary shall be defined such that it contains the processor which executes
      the code."


has been clarified in FIPS 140-2:

      (Levels 1   ,   2, 3, and 4) "If   A cryptographic boundary shall consist of an explicitly defined
      perimeter that establishes the physical bounds of a cryptographic module."


The contents of the FIPS 140-1 Section entitled "Cryptographic Algorithms," consisting of the
single statement:


      (Levels 1   ,   2, 3,   and 4) "Cryptographic modules shall employ FlPS-approved cryptographic
      algorithms."


has been subsumed by this section of FIPS 140-2 in the following requirements:

      (Levels 1,2,3, and 4) "A cryptographic module shall implement at least one Approved
      security function used in an Approved mode of operation."


      (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "The operator shall be able to determine when an Approved mode of
      operation is selected."


      (Levels 1 and 2) "The cryptographic module security policy may specify when a cryptographic
      module is performing in an Approved mode of operation."

      (Levels 3 and 4) "A cryptographic module shall indicate when an Approved mode of operation
      is selected. (Approved security functions are listed in Annex A to this standard.)"



      (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "Documentation shall list all security functions, both Approved and
      non-Approved, that are employed by a cryptographic module and shall specify all modes of
      operation, both Approved and non-Approved."


FIPS 140-2 is more explicit in its requirements for general documentation of hardware, software
and and firmware components. The FIPS 140-1 requirement (moved from the section entitled
"Software Security"):

      (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "Documentation shall include a detailed description of the design of
      software within the module"

has been extended in FIPS 140-2:



                                                            9
                                                                             FIPS 140-1&2 Differences




   i   (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "Documentation shall specify the design of the hardware, software,
                 ,




   I
       and firmware components of a cryptographic module. High-level specification languages for
  i    softvyare/fjrmware or scheniatics for hardware should be used to document the design."


FIPS 140-2 explicitly requires documentation of information contained in cryptographic modules
that must be protected:


       (Levels 1, 2, 3 and 4) "Documentation shall specify all security-related information, including
       secret and private cryptographic keys (both plaintext and encrypted), authentication data
       (e.g.,passwords, PINs), other CSPs, and other protected information (e.g., audited events,
       audit data) whose disclosure or modification can compromise the security of the
       cryptographic module."


Documentation requirements involving interfaces to the cryptographic module, manual and logical
controls, and physical or logical status indicators, that appear in "Module Interfaces" area of FIPS
140-1, have been moved without substantive modification to this area of FIPS 140-2.


3.3.2.     Cryptographic Module Ports and interfaces

This area has been renamed (from Module Interfaces in FIPS 140-1 to Cryptographic Module
Ports and Interfaces in FIPS 140-2) to more accurately reflect the content of the material.


The security requirements involving a "maintenance access interface" and a "maintenance
access role", specified in Section 2 {Module Interfaces) of FIPS 140-1, have been moved to the
Physical Security and Roles, Services, and Authentication, areas of FIPS 140-2.


The higher security level requirements involving the ports used for the input and output of
plaintext security-relevant data have been revised.      Specifically, the FIPS 140-1 requirements:


       (Levels 3 and 4) "The data input and output port or ports used for plaintext cryptographic key
       components, plaintext authentication data, and other unprotected critical security parameters
       shall be physically separated from all other ports of the module. Furthermore, these ports
       shall allow for direct entry of plaintext cryptographic key components, plaintext authentication
       data, and other unprotected critical security parameters, as required in Section 4.8.3."


have been replaced in FIPS 140-2 by:


       (Levels 3 and 4)
       •   "The physical port(s) used for the input and output of plaintext cryptographic key
           components, authentication data, and CSPs shall be physically separated from all other
           ports of the cryptographic module


           or


       •   the logical interfaces used for the input and output of plaintext cryptographic key
           components, authentication data, and CSPs shall be logically separated from all other
           interfaces using a trusted path,


           and

       •   plaintext cryptographic key components, authentication data, and other CSPs shall be
           directly entered into the cryptographic module (e.g., via a trusted path or directly attached
           cable).   (See Section 4.7.4.)"




                                                    10
                                                                                     FIPS 140-1&2 Differences


    3.3.3.     Roles, Services, and Authentication


    The area has been renanned (from Roles and Services in FIPS 140-1 to Roles, Services, and
    Authentication in FIPS 140-2) to more accurately reflect the content of the material.


    3.3.3.1.       Roles

    There are no major changes to the requirements in this subsection.

    3.3.3.2.       Services


    In addition to the "Show Status" and "Perform Self-Tests" services,         FIPS 140-2 explicitly requires
    the following service of a cryptographic module:


i   Perform Approved Security Function: Perform at least one Approved security function used in an
I   Approved mode of operation.

    In FIPS 140-2, for cryptographic modules that implement a bypass capability, the "Show Status"
    indicator must also indicate an alternating state. Specifically, the requirement in FIPS 140-1:


          (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "If a cryptographic module implements a bypass capability, then the
          current status of the module (e.g., the response to a 'Show Status' service request) shall
          indicate whether or not the bypass capability is activated."


    has been replaced by the following requirement in FIPS 140-2:

          (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "If a cryptographic module implements a bypass capability, where
          services are provided without cryptographic processing (e.g., transferring plaintext through
          the module without encryption), then


          •    the module shall show status to indicate whether


          1)       the bypass capability is no? activated, and the module is exclusively providing
                   services     cryptographic processing (e.g., plaintext data /s encrypted),


          2)       the bypass capability is activated and the module is exclusively providing services
                   iv/Y/70t7f cryptographic processing (e.g., plaintext data is nof encrypted), or



          3)       the bypass capability is alternately activated and deactivated and the module is
                   providing some services with cryptographic processing and some services without
                   cryptographic processing (e.g., for modules with multiple communication channels,
                   plaintext data is or is nof encrypted depending on each channel configuration)."


    FIPS 140-2 also requires the vendor to specifically cite the services that can be performed by a
    module for an operator who does not assume a role supported by the module:

      I
          (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "Documentation shall specify any services provided by the
                    ,                                                                                             \




      i   cryptographic module for which the operator is not required to assume an authorized role,               j




          and how these services do not modify, disclose, or substitute cryptographic keys and CSPs,
                                                                     _____
      I                                                                                                           |




      I   or otherwise affect the security of the module."                                                        !




    3.3.3.3.       Operator Authentication

    Implicit in FIPS 140-1    ,   FIPS 140-2 explicitly requires the identification of "other means" to control



                                                            11
                                                                              FIPS 140-1&2 Differences


"initial" crypto-officer access to tine cryptograplnic module:



       (Levels 1 ,2, 3, and 4) "If a cryptographic module does not contain the authentication data       \
   I




   \
       required to authenticate the operator for the first time the module is accessed, then other       I




   I
       authorized methods (e.g., procedural controls or use of factory-set or default authentication     |




   I
       data) shall be used to control access to the module and initialize the authentication             i




   \
       mechanisms."                                                                                      I




FIPS 140-2 specifies requirements for the strength of authentication mechanisms for a
cryptographic module:


       •   (Levels 2, 3, and 4) "For each attempt to use the authentication mechanism, the
           probability shall be less than one in 1 ,000,000 that a random attempt will succeed or a
           false acceptance will occur (e.g., guessing a password or PIN, false acceptance error
           rate of a biometric device, or some combination of authentication methods)."


       •   (Levels 2, 3, and 4) "For multiple attempts to use the authentication mechanism during a
           one-minute period, the probability shall be less than one in 100,000 that a random
           attempt will succeed or a false acceptance will occur."

       •   (Levels 2, 3, and 4) "Feedback of authentication data to an operator shall be obscured
           during authentication (e.g., no visible display of characters when entering a password)."


       •   (Levels 2, 3, and 4) "Feedback provided to an operator during an attempted
           authentication shall not weaken the strength of the authentication mechanism."


       (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "Documentation shall specify:


       •   the authentication mechanisms supported by a cryptographic module,


       •   the types of authentication data required by the module to implement the supported
           authentication mechanisms,


       •   the authorized methods used to control access to the module for the first time and
           initialize the authentication mechanisms, and


       •   the strength of the authentication mechanisms supported by the module."


For Security Level 1    ,   a cryptographic module is not required to employ authentication
mechanisms to control access to the module.         In this case, FIPS 140-2 requires the following:



  ;
       (Security Level 1) "If authentication mechanisms are not supported by a cryptographic
  i
       module, the module shall require that one or more roles either be implicitly or explicitly
  I
       selected by the operator."


3.3.4.     Finite State Model


The area has been renamed (from Finite State Machine Model in FIPS 140-1 to Finite State
Mode/ in FIPS 140-2).

The FIPS 140-1 requires a correspondence between a "maintenance access interface" and
corresponding finite state machine "maintenance states." This is modified in FIPS 140-2 by a
requirement of a correspondence between a "maintenance role" and "maintenance states." More
precisely, the FIPS 140-1 requirement:




                                                      12
                                                                               FIPS 140-1&2 Differences




       (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "If a cryptographic module contains a maintenance access interface,
       then it shall include maintenance states."

has been replaced by the FIPS 140-2 requirement:

       (Levels 12, 3, and 4) "If a cryptographic module contains a maintenance role, then a
                      ,
   I




   I   maintenance state shall be included."



3.3.5.     Physical Security


The security requirements in this area have been reorganized to eliminate the redundancies
found in FIPS 140-1 A new subsection entitled General Security Requirements captures for
                            .




each security level those requirements that are applicable to all three physical embodiments:
single-chip, multiple-chip embedded, and multiple-chip standalone cryptographic modules.


Most of the discussion on the maintenance access interface, found in the area entitled Module
Interfaces of FIPS 140-1 has been moved to this area of FIPS 140-2.
                                 ,




FIPS 140-2 clarifies the lower security level requirements for (procedural and automatic)
zeroization of plaintext secret and private keys and other CSPs when performing physical
maintenance:


  i    (Levels 1 and 2) "When performing physical maintenance, all plaintext secret and private
  1
       keys and other unprotected CSPs contained in the cryptographic module shall be zeroized.
  I    Zeroization shall either be performed procedurally by the operator or automatically by the
  i    cryptographic module."


The documentation requirements have been extended to include how the zeroization takes place
when accessing the maintenance access interface.

  i
       (Level 1   ,   2, 3, and 4) "Documentation shall specify the maintenance access interface and      i




       how plaintext secret and private keys and CSPs are zeroized when the maintenance access
                                                    __
  I                                                                                                       I




  I
       interface is accessed."                _                                    __                     !




At Security Level 2 in FIPS 140-2, the physical embodiments for multiple-chip embedded
cryptographic modules have been extended to include the use of a tamper-evident enclosure as
an alternative to the use of a tamper-evident coating.

3.3.6.     Operational Environment


This area has been renamed (from Operating System Security \r\ FIPS 140-1 to Operational
Environment in FIPS 140-2) to more accurately reflect the content of the material.

The substantive changes made to the operating system requirements involve:

       •   Adoption of Recommended CC Protection Profiles functional requirements evaluated at
           Evaluation Assurance Level (EAL) 2 with additional functional and assurance
           requirements (in place of the TCSEC C2, B1, and B2 functional and assurance
           requirements). (Note that TCSEC labeling requirements are no longer required for
           Security Levels 3-4.)


       •   Discretionary access control mechanisms that are explicitly role-based as opposed to




                                                       13
                                                                           FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



          operator and/or process-based, and

      •   Requirements for audit capabilities and run-time auditing.

General

Tlie criteria for applicability of the operating system requirements has been expanded in FIPS
140-2.    In particular, the FIPS   140-1 requirement:


      (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "The operating systems requirements in this section apply to a
                 ,




      cryptographic module only if the module provides a means whereby and operator can load
      and execute software or firmware that was not included as part of the validation of the
      module."

has been replaced by the FIPS 140-2 requirements:


  i
      (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "If the operational environment is a modifiable operational
  i
      environment, the operating system requirements in Section 4.6.1 shall apply. If the
  I
      operational environment is a limited operational environment, the operating system
  i
      requirements in Section 4.6.1 do not apply. A limited operational environment refers to a
  I
      static non-modifiable virtual operational environment (e.g., JAVA virtual machine or a non-
  i   programmable PC card) with no underlying general purpose operating system upon which
  I
      the operational environment uniquely resides."


FIPS 140-2 is explicit in documentation requirements regarding the strength of the operating
system:


  I
      (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "Documentation shall specify the operational environment for a
                 ,
                                                                                                       |




  i
      cryptographic module, including, if applicable, the operating system employed by the module,     j




  I
      and for Security Levels 2, 3, and_4-, th_e_P_ro_te_ctiqn_P_rofi|e_and the CC assurance level."   j




Security Level 1

The FIPS 140-1 requirements that exclude the use of multiuser, multiprocess systems:

      (Level 1 only) "Use of the cryptographic module shall be limited to a single user at a time."


      (Level 1 only) "Use of the cryptographic module shall be dedicated to the cryptographic
      process during the time the cryptographic process is in use."

have been replaced by a set of requirements that achieve the same security within the context of
current multiprocess operating systems:


      (Level 1 only) 'The operating system shall be restricted to a single operator mode of
      operation (i.e., concurrent operators are explicitly excluded)."


      (Level 1 only) 'The cryptographic module shall prevent access by other processes to plaintext
      private and secret keys, CSPs, and intermediate key generation values during the time the
      cryptographic module is executing/operational. Processes that are spawned by the
      cryptographic module are owned by the module and are not owned by external
      processes/operators. Non-cryptographic processes shall not interrupt a cryptographic
      module during execution."

The FIPS 140-1 requirements on the internal storage of cryptographic software have been
generalized in FIPS 140-2 and extended to include firmware. Specifically, the FIPS 140-1




                                                    14
                                                                               FIPS 140-1&2 Differences


requirement:


         (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "All cryptographic software shall be installed only as executable code
         in   order to discourage scrutiny and modification by users."

has been replaced in FIPS 140-2 by:

     i   (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "All cryptographic software and firmware shall be installed in a form
     j
         that protects the software and firmware source and executable code from unauthorized
     i
         disclosure and modification."


The application of an Approved integrity technique for software has been extended in FIPS 140-2
to also include firmware.        Specifically, the FIPS 140-1 requirement:


         (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "A cryptographic mechanism using a FIPS approved authentication
         technique (e.g., the computation and verification of a data authentication code or NIST digital
         signature algorithm) shall be applied to the cryptographic software within the cryptographic
         module."

has been replaced in FIPS 140-2 by:

     i   (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "A cryptographic mechanism using an Approved integrity technique
     i   (e.g., an Approved message authentication code or digital signature algorithm) shall be
     I   applied to all cryptographic software and firmware components within the cryptographic
     i   module."


Security Level 2

InFIPS 140-2, the functional security requirements of the OS are those specified by the
Recommended Protection Profiles evaluated at the CC EAL2. More precisely, the FIPS 140-1
requirements:

         (Level 2 Only) "All cryptographic software, cryptographic keys and other critical security
         parameters, and control and status information shall be under the control of an operating
         system that provides controlled access protection (i.e., C2 protection in accordance with the
         Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC), or FIPS approved equivalent). Only
         operating systems that have been evaluated by a NIST accredited evaluation authority and
         against a FIPS approved criteria shall be used."


have been replaced by the FIPS 140-2 requirements:


     I
         (Level 2 Only) "All cryptographic software and firmware, cryptographic keys and CSPs, and
     I
         control and status information shall be under the control of

     i




     I
               an operating system that meets the functional requirements specified in the Protection
     I
               Profiles listed in Annex B and is evaluated at the CC evaluation assurance level EAL2, or
     i




     !_ _ an equivalent evaluated trusted operating system."

The discretionary access control mechanisms of an OS have been clarified in FIPS 140-2 as
being "role based" rather than "operator and/or process based" in FIPS 140-1 The applicable
                                                                                    .




FIPS 140-2 requirements are as follows:




                                                       15
                                                                                   FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



         (Levels 2, 3, and 4) "To protect plaintext data, cryptograpfiic software and firmware,
         cryptographic keys and CSPs, and authentication data, the discretionary access control
         mechanisms of the operating system shall be configured to specify the set of roles that can

             execute stored cryptographic software and firmware,

             modify (i.e., write, replace, and delete) the following cryptographic module software or
             firmware components stored within the cryptographic boundary: cryptographic programs,
             cryptographic data (e.g., cryptographic keys and audit data), CSPs, and plaintext data,

             read the following cryptographic software components stored within the cryptographic
             boundary: cryptographic data (e.g., cryptographic keys and audit data), CSPs and
             plaintext data and


             enter cryptographic keys and CSPs."


The FIPS 140-1 requirements for OS audit capabilities at Security Levels 3 and 4 have been
extended to Security Level 2 in FIPS 140-2:

     i   (Levels 2, 3, and 4) "The operating system shall provide an audit mechanism to record
     i   modifications^ accesses, deletions, and additions of cryptographic data and CSPs."


FIPS 140-2 specifies the set of events that must be must be audited by the OS:

     I   (Levels 2, 3, and 4) "The following events shall be recorded by the audit mechanism:
     i




     I
         -   attempts to provide invalid input for crypto officer functions, and
     I
         -   the addition or deletion of an operator to/from a crypto officer role."


FIPS 140-2 specifies the set of events that must be auditable by the OS:

         (Levels 2, 3, and 4) "The audit mechanism shall be capable of auditing the following events:

         -   operations to process audit data stored in the audit trail,
         -   requests to use authentication data management mechanisms,
         -   use of a security-relevant crypto officer function,
         -   requests to access user authentication data associated with the cryptographic module,
         -   use of an authentication mechanism (e.g., login) associated with the cryptographic
             module,
         -   explicit requests to assume a crypto officer role, and
         -   the allocation of a function to a crypto officer role."


Security Level 3

In   FIPS 140-2, the functional security requirements of the OS are those specified by the
Recommended Protection Profiles evaluated at the CC EAL3. More precisely, the FIPS 140-1
requirements:

         (Level 3) "All cryptographic software, cryptographic keys and other critical security
         parameters, control and status information shall be labeled and under the control of an
         operating system that provides labeled protection (i.e., B1 protection in accordance with the
         Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC), or FIPS approved equivalent). Only
         operating systems that have been evaluated by a NIST accredited evaluation authority and
         against a FIPS approved criteria shall be used."




                                                       16
                                                                               FIPS 140-1&2 Differences


have been replaced by the FIPS 140-2 requirements:

         (Level 3) "All cryptographic software and firmware, cryptographic keys and CSPs, and control
         and status information shall be under the control of

             an operating system that meets the functional requirements specified in the Protection
             Profiles listed in Annex B. The operating system shall be evaluated at the CC evaluation
             assurance level EAL3 and include the following additional requirements: Trusted_Path
             (FTP_TRP.1) and Informal TOE Security Policy Model (ADV_SPM.1), or

             an equivalent evaluated trusted operating system."

The TCSEC terminology of a Trusted Computing Base (TCB) in FIPS 140-1 has been changed to
the CC terminology of a Target of Evaluation Security Functions (TSF):


         (Levels 3 and 4) "All cryptographic keys and CSPs, authentication data, control inputs, and
         status outputs shall be communicated via a trusted mechanism (e.g., a dedicated I/O physical
         port or a trusted path).  a trusted path is used, the Target of Evaluation Security Functions
                                    If


         (TSF) shall support the trusted path between the TSF and the operator when a positive TSF-
         to-operator connection is required. Communications via this trusted path shall be activated
         exclusively by an operator or the TSF and shall be logically isolated from other paths."


FIPS 140-2 specifies events that must be audited by the OS:

     !   (Levels 3 and 4) "In addition to the audit requirements of Security Level 2, the following
     j   events shall be recorded by the audit mechanism:

     !       attempt to use the trusted path function, and
     !       Identification of the initiator and target of a trusted path."


Security Level 4

InFIPS 140-2, the functional security requirements of the OS are those specified by the
Recommended Protection Profiles evaluated at the CC EAL4. More precisely, the FIPS 140-1
requirements:

         (Level 4) "All cryptographic software, cryptographic keys and other critical security
         parameters, control and status information shall be labeled and under the control of an
         operating system that provides structured protection (i.e., B2 protection in accordance with
         the Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria (TCSEC), or FIPS approved equivalent).
         Only operating systems that have been evaluated by a NIST accredited evaluation authority
         and against a FIPS approved criteria SHALL be used."

have been replaced by the FIPS 140-2 requirements:

     i   (Level 4) "All cryptographic software, cryptographic keys and CSPs, and control and status       i




     j
         information shall be under the control of                                                        j



                                                                                                          i
     i




     j
             an operating system that meets the functional requirements specified in the Protection
             Profiles listed in Annex B. The operating system shall be evaluated at the CC evaluation
                                                                                                          |




     1                                                                                                    i




     I
             assurance level EAL4, or                                                                     |



     i                                                                                                    i




     i
             an equivalent evaluated trusted operating system."                                           j




                                                        17
                                                                                   FIPS 140-1&2 Differences


3.3.7.     Cryptographic Key Management

The requirements for Key Archiving (Section 4.8.6 in FIPS 140-1) have been eliminated in FIPS
140-2.


The documentation requirements have been explicitly specified in FIPS 140-2:

  ;
      (Levels 1   ,       2, 3, and 4) "Documentation shall specify all cryptographic keys, cryptographic key   !




  i
      components, and CSPs employed by a cryptographic module.^' _                                              j




3.3.7.1.      Random Number Generators (RNGs)

FIPS 140-2 specifies security requirements for cryptographic modules that implement
deterministic and/or nondeterministic random number generators (RNGs).


       (Levels 1,2,3, and 4) "If a cryptographic module employs Approved or non-Approved RNGs
      in an Approved mode of operation, the data output from the RNG shall pass the continuous
      random number generator test as specified in Section 4.9.2. Depending on the security
      level, the data output from an Approved RNG shall pass all statistical tests for randomness as
      specified in Section 4.9.1. Approved deterministic RNGs shall be subject to the cryptographic
      algorithm test in Section 4.9.1. Approved RNGs are listed in Annex C to this standard."


      (Levels 1   ,       2, 3, and 4) "Until such time as an Approved nondeterministic   RNG standard
      exists, nondeterministicRNGs approved for use in classified applications may be used for
      key generation or to seed Approved deterministic RNGs used in key generation.
      Commercially available nondeterministic RNGs may be used for the purpose of generating
      seeds for Approved deterministic RNGs. Nondeterministic RNGs shall comply with all
      applicable RNG requirements of this standard."


       (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "An Approved RNG shall be used for the generation of cryptographic
                      ,




      keys used by an Approved security function. The output from a non-Approved RNG may be
      used 1) as input (e.g., seed, and seed key) to an Approved deterministic RNG or 2) to
      generate initialization vectors (IVs) for Approved security function(s). The seed and seed key
      shall not have the same value."


       (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "Documentation shall specify each RNG (Approved and non-
                      ,




      Approved) employed by a cryptographic module."

3.3.7.2.      Key Generation

FIPS 140-2 allows only Approved RNGs to be used in the key generation process.                 Specifically,
the FIPS 140-1 requirement:


      (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "When a random number is used in the key generation process, all
                  ,




      values shall be generated randomly or pseudorandomly such that all combinations of bits and
      all possible values are equally likely to be generated."



has been replaced in FIPS 140-2 by:


  1   (Levels 1   ,       2, 3, and 4) "If an Approved key generation method requires input from a   RNG,       i




  I
      then an Approved RNG that meets the requirements specified in Section 4.7.1 shall be used."               |




FIPS 140-2 specifies security requirements regarding the general compromise of the key
generation algorithm:




                                                           18
                                                                                        FIPS 140-1&2 Differences




         i
             (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "Compromising the security of tlie key generation method (e.g.,
             guessing the seed value to initialize the deterministic RNG) shall require at least as many
         I




         i   operations as determining the value of the generated key."


FIPS 140-2 is explicit in the manner in which intermediate key generation values can be output by
a cryptographic module. Specifically, the FIPS 140-1 requirement:

             (Levels 1   ,   2, 3, and 4) "If intermediate key generation states and values shall not be
             accessible outside of the module in plaintext or otherwise unprotected form."

has been replaced by the FIPS 140-2 requirement:

             (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "If intermediate key generation values are output from the
                         ,




             cryptographic module, the values shall be output either 1) in encrypted form or 2) under split
             knowledge procedures."

3.3.7.3.             Key Establishment

In   FIPS 140-1, this subsection is entitled Key Distribution.

FIPS 140-2 specifies security requirements for establishing cryptographic keys using radio
communications:


             (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "If, in lieu of an Approved key establishment method, a radio
             communications cryptographic module implements Over-The-Air-Rekeying (OTAR), it shall
             be implemented as specified in the TIA/EIA Telecommunications Systems Bulletin, APCO
             Project 25, Over-The-Air-Rekeying (OTAR) Protocol, New Technology Standards Project,
             Digital Radio Technical Standards, TSB102.AACA, January, 1996, Telecommunications
             Industry Association."


FIPS 140-2 specifies security requirements regarding the general compromise of the key
establishment method:


     !
             (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "Compromising the security of the key establishment method (e.g.,
                         ,                                                                                         i




     I
             compromising the security of the algorithm used for key establishment) shall require at least
     j
             as many operations as determining the value of the cryptographic key being transported or             i




             agreed upon."                                                                                         j




3.3.7.4.             Key Entry and Output

FIPS 140-2 specifies the manner for entering and outputting cryptographic keys:

             (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "If cryptographic keys are entered into or output from a cryptographic
                         ,



             module, the entry or output of keys snail be performed using either manual (e.g., via a
             keyboard) or electronic methods (e.g., smart cards/tokens, PC cards, or other electronic key
             loading devices)."


             (Levels 1   ,   2, 3, and 4) "A seed key, if entered during key generation, shall be entered in the
             same manner as cryptographic keys."

If   secret and private keys are themselves encrypted, FIPS 140-2 requires that an Approved
algorithm be used:




                                                               19
                                                                               FIPS 140-1&2 Differences




  i       (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "All encrypted secret and private keys, entered into or output from a
                     ,




  j
          cryptographic module and used in an Approved mode of operation, shall be encrypted using
  i       an Approved algorithm."

When split knowledge procedures are used to enter or output secret and private keys, FIPS 140-
2 specifies requirements for the key components:


  I
          (Levels 3 and 4) "If split knowledge procedures are used:

  i           the cryptographic module shall separately authenticate the operator entering or outputting
  !           each key component,

  :           plaintext cryptographic key components shall be directly entered into or output from the
  i           cryptographic module (e.g., via a trusted path or directly attached cable) without traveling
  I
              through any enclosing or intervening systems where the key components may
  I
              inadvertently be stored, combined, or othenwise processed (see Section 4.2),


  i           at least two key components shall be required to reconstruct the original cryptographic
              key,
  I




  i
              documentation shall prove that if knowledge of n key components is required to
  i           reconstruct the original key, then knowledge of any n-1 key components provides no
  I           information about the original key other than the length, and


  1
              documentation shall specify the procedures employed by a cryptographic module."

3.3.7.5.             Key Storage

FIPS 140-2 clarifies the storing of secret and private keys in a cryptographic module.        In

particular, the FIPS 140-1 requirement:


          (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "When contained within a cryptographic module, secret and private
          keys may be stored in plaintext form."

has been replaced in FIPS 140-2 by the requirement:


  1
          (Levels 1,2,3, and 4) "Cryptographic keys stored within a cryptographic module shall be
  j       stored either in plaintext form or encrypted forrp/'


3.3.7.6.             Key Zeroization

This subsection was entitled Key Destruction in FIPS 140-1.


3.3.8.        Electromagnetic Interference/Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMI/EMC)


Reference to the specific subparts of the 47 Code of Federal Regulations for EMI/EMC
requirements have been updated in FIPS 140-2:

   :      (Levels 1 and 2) "A cryptographic module shall (at a minimum) conform to the EMI/EMC               \




   i
          requirements specified by 47 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 15, Subpart B, Unintentional        |




      I
          Radiators, Digital Devices, Class A (i.e., for business use)."                                     |




   i
                                                                                                             i



   i
                                                                                                             i



      i                                                                                                      j




                                                        20
                                                                                     FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



           (Levels 3 and 4) "A cryptographic module shall (at a minimum) conform to the EMI/EMC
           requirements specified by 47 Code of Federal Regulations, Part 15, Subpart B, Unintentional
       I




       i




   I
           Radiators^ P'9'^^J P?^i^5?' Pl^_^® ^              home use)."

3.3.9.         Self-Tests


FIPS 140-2 is explicit In the documentation requirements:

   i       (Levels 1,2,3, and 4) "Documentation shall specify:


               the self-tests performed by a cryptographic module, including power-up and conditional             i




               tests,                                                                                             i




                                                                                                                  i



                                                                                                                  i




               the error states that a cryptographic module can enter when a self-test fails, and                 j



                                                                                                                  i



                                                                                                                  i




               the conditions and actions necessary to exit the error states and resume normal                    |




               operation of a cryptographic module (i.e., this may include maintenance of the module, or          \




               returning the module to the vendor for servicing."                                                 I




3.3.9.1 .          Power-up Tests

Cryptographic algorithm test

The application of the cryptographic algorithms test has been clarified. More precisely, the FIPS
140-1 requirement:


           (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "A known answer test shall be run for each cryptographic function
                        ,




           (e.g., encryption, decryption, authentication) that is implemented."


has been replaced in FIPS 140-2 by:


   I       (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "A cryptographic algorithm test using a known answer shall be
                        ,




   I
           conducted for all modes (e.g., encryption, decryption, authentication, and deterministic
   I
           random number generation) of each Approved cryptographic algorithm implemented by a
   j
           cryptographic module."


   i       (Levels 1    ,   2, 3, and 4) "Cryptographic algorithms whose outputs vary for a given set of inputs

   I
           (e.g., the Digital Signature Algorithm) shall be tested using a known-answer test or shall be

   I
           tested using a pair-wise consistency test."


Software/firmware integrity test

In applying the software/firmware integrity test,            a lower bound has been placed on the size of the
error detection code:


   i       (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "If an EDC is used, the EDC shall be at least 16 bits in length."


Statistical random number generator tests


The four statistical random number tests, recommended in FIPS 140-1 with the possibility of
substituting alternative equivalent or superior tests, are required without exception in FIPS 140-2.
Specifically, the FIPS 140-2 requirement is:




                                                             21
                                                                                    FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



          (Levels 3 and 4) "A single bit stream of 20,000 consecutive bits of output from each RNG
      I                                                                                                        |


      i   shall be subjected to the following four tests: monobit test, poker test, runs test, and long runs   \




      \
          test."                                                                                               i


      L                                                                                                        I




The acceptance intervals for each of the statistical random number tests have been revised to
decrease the probability of a false acceptance for a single bit stream of 20,000 consecutive bits of
output:


          •     Monobit Test: (9,725 < X < 1 0,275) for the number of 1 's.
          •     Poker Test: (2.16 < X < 46.17) for the stated measure.
          •     Runs Test:

                                              Length of           Required
                                                Run               Interval

                                          1               2,343 - 2,657
                                          2               1,135-1,365
                                          3               542 - 708
                                          4               251 - 373
                                          5               1 1 1   -   201
                                          6+              1 1 1   -   201


          •     Long Runs Test: a long run is defined to be of length 26 or more (of either zeros or ones).

3.3.9.2.            Conditional Tests


Pairwise consistency test


The following requirement involving key agreement is new in FIPS 140-2:

          (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "If the keys are to be used to perform key agreement, then the
                       ,



          cryptographic module shall create a second, compatible key pair. The cryptographic module
          shall then perform both sides of the key agreement algorithm and shall compare the resulting
          shared values. If the shared values are not equal the test shall fail."

Manual key entry test

The following new requirement in FIPS 140-2 applies to keys or key components that are
manually entered into a cryptographic module:


  I
          (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4)_"lf an EDC is used, the EDC shall be at least 16 b[ts in length."


Bypass test

The following requirements have been in added in FIPS 140-2 for cryptographic modules that
implement a bypass test:

          (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "If a cryptographic module implements a bypass capability where the
          services may be provided without cryptographic processing (e.g., transferring plaintext
          through the module), then the following bypass tests shall be performed to ensure that a
          single point of failure of module components will not result in the unintentional output of
          plaintext:


          1 .   A cryptographic module shall test for the correct operation of the services providing


                                                          22
                                                                                 FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



           cryptographic processing when a switch tal<es place between an exclusive bypass
  I




  i        service and an exclusive cryptographic service.
  j




  I   2.   If a cryptographic module can automatically alternate between a bypass service and a


  !        cryptographic service, providing some services with cryptographic processing and some
  I
           services without cryptographic processing, then the module shall test for the correct
  i        operation of the services providing cryptographic processing when the mechanism
  I        governing the switching procedure is modified (e.g., an IP address source/destination
           table).
  i



  i




  I   (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "Documentation shall specify the mechanism or logic governing the
  i   switching procedure."


3.3.10.    Design Assurance

This area has been renamed (from Software Security In FIPS 140-1 to Design Assurance in FIPS
140-2) to more accurately reflect the content of the material. New security requirements are
specified for the following subsections:


      •    Configuration Management - provides assurance that the functional requirements and
           specifications are realized in the implementation of a cryptographic module.


      •    Delivery and Operation - provides assurance that a cryptographic module is securely
           delivered to authorized operators, and is installed and initialized in a correct and secure
           manner.

      •    Development - provides assurance that the implementation of a cryptographic module
           corresponds to the module's security policy and functional specification.

      •    Guidance Documents - concerned with the correct configuration, maintenance,
           administration and secure use of a cryptographic module.


3.3.10.1.      Configuration l\/lanagement


The specific security requirements for this subsection are:

      (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "A configuration management system shall be implemented for a
      cryptographic module and module components within the cryptographic boundary, and for
      associated module documentation. Each version of each configuration item (e.g.,
      cryptographic module, module components, user guidance, security policy, and operating
      system) that comprises the module and associated documentation shall be assigned and
      labeled with a unique identification number."


3.3.10.2.      Delivery and Operation


The specific security requirements for this subsection are:

  j   (Security Levels 1   ,   2, 3,   and 4) "Documentation shall specify the procedures for secure
  I
      installation, initialization, and startup of a cryptographic module."
  j




  I
      (Security Levels 2, 3, and 4) "In addition to the requirements of Security Level 1,
  1   documentation shall specify the procedures required for maintaining security while
  j
      distributing and delivering versions of a cryptographic module to authorized operators."




                                                         23
                                                                              FIPS 140-1&2 Differences




3.3.10.3.          Development

This subsection subsumes the security requirements for Software Security as specified in FIPS
140-1   In FIPS 140-2, these requirements are extended to include the documentation of
        .




hardware design and to strengthen the requirements for documentation of software and firmware.

The requirements for documentation of software have been broadened to include firmware and
hardware. More specifically, the FIPS 140-1 requirements:

      (Levels 1, 2, 3, and 4) "Documentation shall include a detailed explanation of the
      correspondence between the design of the software and the cryptographic security policy
      (i.e., the   rules of operation)."


      (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "Documentation shall include a complete source code listing for all
                   ,



      software contained within the module. For each software module, software function and
      software procedures, the source code listing shall be annotated with comments that clearly
      depict the relationship of these software entities to the design of the software."


have been replaced in FIPS 140-2 by the requirements:

      (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "Documentation shall specify the correspondence between the design
                   ,



      of the hardware, software, and firmware components of a cryptographic module and the
      cryptographic module security policy (see Section 4.1)."

      (Levels 1 2, 3, and 4) "If a cryptographic module contains software or firmware components,
                   ,




      documentation shall specify the source code for the software and firmware components,
      annotated with comments that clearly depict the correspondence of the components to the
      design of the module."

      (Levels 1    ,   2, 3, and 4) "If a cryptographic module contains hardware components,
      documentation shall specify the schematics and/or Hardware Description Language (HDL)
      listings for the hardware components."


At Security Level 2, FIPS 140-2 has new requirements for functional specification of the
interfaces and ports and the behavior of the cryptographic module:


      (Levels 2, 3 and 4) "Documentation shall specify a functional specification that informally
      describes a cryptographic module, the external ports and the interfaces of the module, and
      the purpose of the interfaces."


At Security Level 3, the use of high-level languages in the design has been extended to include
firmware and hardware. Specifically, the FIPS 140-1 requirement:

      (Levels 3 and 4) "All software within a cryptographic module shall be implemented using a
      high-level language, except that the limited use of low-level languages (e.g., assembly
      languages) is allowed when it is essential to the performance of the module or when a high-
      level language is not available."


has been replaced by the FIPS 140-2 requirements:


  I
      (Levels 3 and 4) "All software and firmware components within a cryptographic module shall
  i   be implemented using a high-level language, except that the limited use of a low-level
  i
      language (e.g., assembly language or microcode) is allowed if essential to the performance



                                                       24
                                                                                      FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



          of the module or when a high-level language is not available."
  I
                                                                                                                   |


  i
                                                                                                                   i




  I
          (Levels 3 and 4)          "If   HDL is used, all hardware components within a cryptographic module       I




  i       shall be implemented using a high-level specification language."                                         |




At Security Level 4, FIPS 140-2 adds the new requirement:


      i
          (Level 4) "Documentation shall specify a rationale that demonstrates the consistency and
      ipo.!]lP!?^^.0.®??..9L!.']?_!9.rrD_^^^^                                                 security policy."


and modifies other documentation requirements:

          "Documentation shall specify an informal proof of the correspondence between the formal
          model and the functional specification.

          Documentation shall specify an informal proof of the correspondence between the design of
          the cryptographic module (as reflected by the precondition and postcondition annotations)
          and the functional specification."

3.3.10.4.            Guidance Documents

The specific requirements for this subsection are:

          (Levels 1   ,   2, 3,   and 4) "Crypto officer guidance shall specify:

          •   the administrative functions, security events, security parameters (and parameter values,
              as appropriate), physical ports, and logical interfaces of the cryptographic module
              available to the crypto officer,


          •   procedures on how to administer the cryptographic module in a secure manner, and

          •   assumptions regarding user behavior that are relevant to the secure operation of the
              cryptographic module."

          (Levels 1   ,   2, 3, and 4)      "User guidance shall specify:

          •   the Approved security functions, physical ports, and logical interfaces available to the
              users of a cryptographic module, and

          •   all   user responsibilities necessary for the secure operation of a cryptographic module."


3.3.11. Mitigation of Otiier Attacks


Certain types of cryptographic modules may be susceptible to attacks for which testable security
requirements were not available at the time FIPS 140-2 was issued (e.g., power analysis, timing
analysis, and fault induction) or are outside of the scope of the standard (e.g., TEMPEST).                FIPS
140-2 requires the vendor to describe any such capabilities of the cryptographic modules:


          (Levels 1   ,   2, 3,   and 4) "If a cryptographic module is designed to mitigate one or more specific
          attacks, then the module's security policy shall specify the security mechanisms employed by
                                             The existence and proper functioning of the security
          the module to mitigate the attack(s).
          mechanisms will be validated when requirements and associated tests are developed."




                                                                25
                                                                            FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



                          4.   DIFFERENCES IN APPENDIXES
This section details the differences in the Appendixes between FIPS 140-1 and 140-2.

Appendix A Summary of Documentation Requirements
               :




In   FIPS 140-2, the information in Appendix A has been updated, commensurate with the changes
to Section 4 of the standard.


Appendix B Recommended Software Development Practices
               :




In Appendix B of FIPS 140-2 the
                              recommendations for modular design, programming, and
documentation have been updated, consistent with modern practices.

Appendix C Cryptographic Security Policy
               :




In FIPS 140-2, Appendix C specifies detailed requirements for a Security Policy (not specified in

FIPS 140-1) that must be provided by the vendor of the cryptographic module:

      "A cryptographic module security policy shall consist of a specification of the security rules,
      under which a module shall operate, including the security rules derived from the
      requirements of this standard and the additional security rules imposed by the vendor.

      The specification shall be sufficiently detailed to answer the following questions:

      •   What access does operator X, performing service /while in role Z, have to security-
          relevant data item Wior every role, sen/ice, and security-related data item in the
          cryptographic module?


      •   What physical security mechanisms are implemented to protect a cryptographic module
          and what actions are required to ensure that physical security of a module is maintained?

      •   What security mechanisms are implemented in a cryptographic module to mitigate
          against attacks for which testable requirements are not defined in the Standard?


      A cryptographic security policy shall be expressed in terms of roles, services, and
      cryptographic l<eys and CSPs. At a minimum, the following shall be specified:

      •   an identification and authentication (l&A) policy,
      •   an access control policy,
      •   a physical security policy, and
      •   a security policy for mitigation of other attacks."

Further details are provided (in Appendix C of FIPS 140-2) as to what constitutes an acceptable
specification of these components. Check lists are provided that serve as guides in determining
whether or not the security policy is complete and contains the appropriate details.

Appendix D Selected Bibliography
               :




InFIPS 140-2, the citation of documents related to or supporting the Standard has been updated.
Outdated references have been eliminated.




                                                    26
                                                                       FIPS 140-1&2 Differences



                         5.   ANNEXES TO THE STANDARD
The lists of Approved security functions, protection profiles, random number generators, and key
establishment techniques are expected to grow over time. In order to dynamically incorporate
these changes in the requirements, these lists will be maintained in the following Annexes to
FIPS 140-2:

National Institute of Standards and Technology, FIPS 140-2 Annex A: Approved Security
Functions, available at URL: csrc.nist.gov/cryptval.

National Institute of Standards and Technology, FIPS 140-2 Annex B: Recommended Protection
Profiles, available at URL: csrc.nist.gov/cryptval.


National Institute of Standards and Technology, FIPS 140-2 Annex C: Approved Random
Number Generators, available at URL: csrc.nist.gov/cryptval.

National Institute of Standards and Technology, FIPS 140-2 Annex D: Approved Key
Establishment Techniques, available at URL: csrc.nist.gov/cryptval.




                                                  27
m           J.kJ                     Technical Publications

Periodical

                                                                                           —
Journal of Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Reports NIST research
and development in those disciplines of the physical and engineering sciences in which the Institute is
active. These include physics, chemistry, engineering, mathematics, and computer sciences. Papers cover a
broad range of subjects, with major emphasis on measurement methodology and the basic technology
underlying standardization. Also included from time to time are survey articles on topics closely related to
the Institute's technical and scientific programs. Issued six times a year.




Nonperiodicals

Monographs  —Major                                        on
                          contributions to the technical literature        various subjects related to the
                   and
Institute's scientific      technical activities.
Handbooks— Recommended codes of engineering and                      (including
                                                                 industrial practice codes)       safety         devel-
oped  incooperation with                                             and regulatory
                             interested industries, professional organizations,                       bodies.

Special Publications—Include proceedings of conferences sponsored by NIST, NIST annual                     reports, and
other special publications appropriate to this grouping such as wall charts, pocket cards, and bibliographies.

                                                    —
National Standard Reference Data Series Provides quantitative data on the physical and chemical
properties of materials, compiled from the world's literature and critically evaluated. Developed under a
worldwide program coordinated by NIST under the authority of the National Standard Data Act (Public
Law 90-396). NOTE: The Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data (JPCRD) is published
bimonthly for NIST by the American Institute of Physics (AIP). Subscription orders and renewals are
available from AIR RO. Box 503284, St. Louis,           MO
                                                      63150-3284.
                            —
Building Science Series Disseminates technical information developed at the Institute on building
materials, components, systems, and whole structures. The series presents research results, test methods, and
performance criteria related to the structural and environmental functions and the durability and safety
characteristics of building elements and systems.

Technical Notes    —   Studies or reports which are complete in themselves but restrictive in their treatment of
a subject. Analogous to monographs but not so comprehensive in scope or definitive in treatment of the
subject area. Often serve as a vehicle for final reports of work performed at NIST under the sponsorship of
other government agencies.
Voluntary Product Standards        — Developed under procedures published by the Department of Commerce
in Part 10, Title 15, of the    Code of Federal Regulations. The standards establish nationally recognized
requirements for products, and provide all concerned interests with a basis for common understanding of
the characteristics of the products.    NIST administers this program in support of the efforts of private-sector
standardizing organizations.

Order the following NIST publications      —FIPS and NISTIRs—from the National Technical Information
Service, Springfield, VA 22161.

Federal Information Processing Standards Publications (FIPS PUB)                  —    Publications in this series
collectively constitute the Federal Information Processing Standards Register. The Register serves as the
official source   of information in the Federal Government regarding standards issued by NIST pursuant to
the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 as amended. Public Law 89-306 (79 Stat.
1127), and as implemented by Executive Order            1   1717 (38 FR 12315, dated May 11, 1973) and Part 6 of
Title 15   CFR (Code of Federal Regulations).
                                                             —
NIST Interagency or Internal Reports (NISTIR) The series includes interim or final reports on work
performed by NIST for outside sponsors (both government and nongovernment). In general, initial
distribution is handled by the sponsor; public distribution handled by sales through the National Technical
                                                                   is

Information Service, Springfield, VA 22161, in hard copy, electronic media, or microfiche form. NISTIR's
may also report results of NIST projects of transitory or limited interest, including those that will be
published subsequently in more comprehensive form.
u
<u
E                o
                 o
UIO   ard
                 ?
U pu             ON
                 OS
                 00
                       o
                       o
o in             O
B o
E 3 W)            ^   c >
fc«
      .1:;
      -tT!   o   ao
